“i'm sorry did you say street magic” & there are names here more powerful than our own
by Caro Asercion
i'm sorry did you say street magic is a GMless city-building story game for two to six players, that runs three or more hours. Discover and imagine a city filled with life and vivid detail, packed with a myriad of neighborhoods, landmarks, and residents. Discover their true names, and the ways that they intersect—then set events in motion that will change or alter
their relationships. there are names here more powerful than our own is a worldbuilder, and a sister game to i'm sorry did you say street magic. It can be used in conjunction with street magic, or as a
standalone tool, by one or more players. Watch the VOD of this session here: The Game “i'm sorry did you say street magic” by Caro Asercion “there are names here more powerful than our own” by Caro Asercion Actual Play
● Let's Play: I'm Sorry Did You Say Street Magic PT1 | #GENERATIONFANTASY Articles
● Interview with Caro Asercion - First Person Scholar

City Vibes ● The Unsleeping City [Full Episodes] - YouTube
🍃 ● city blues. [lofi / jazz hop / chillhop mix]
● Floating City Chill Lofi Beats
Play Alikes ● TTRPGs ○ there are names here more powerful than our own by Caro Asercion ○ Beak, Feather, & Bone by Tyler Crumrine ○ Companions Tale by Laura Simpson/Sweet Potato Press ○ Epitaph by lessthanthreegames ○ A Mending by Shing Yin Khor ○ Microscope by Ben Robbins ○ The Quiet Year by Avery Alder
● Video Games ○ Cozy Grove bySpry Fox LLC ○ Dorfromantik by Toukana Interactive
Read Alikes ● The City We Became by N.K. Jemisin ● Neverwhere by Neil Gaiman ● Piranesi by Susanna Clarke ● The Name of the Wind by Patrick Rothfuss ● Wayfarers Series & Monk and Robot Series by Becky Chambers
Safety Tools ● Script Change by Beau Jágr Sheldon ● Guest Blog: An Introduction to Lines and Veils ● The Door is Open by Eirik Fatland ○ Blog by Lizzie Stark ○ Blog 2 by Eirik Fatland ● TTRPG Safety Toolkit collected by Kienna Shaw and Lauren Bryant-Monk ○ TTRPG Safety Toolkit Guide ○ Google Drive

Game RT Twitch Policy 1. Be kind and respectful to one another 2. Hate speech of any type will not be tolerated 3. We reserve the right to remove anyone from the chat for any reason 4. If you are feeling harassed by anyone, please notify a GameRT twitch mod and one of us will assist you 5. If you'd rather talk privately about anything, please send us a direct message
Learn More About GameRT Blog: bit.ly/GameRTBlog Facebook: bit.ly/GameRTLeague & bit.ly/GameRTFacebook Resources: bit.ly/GameRTPublicResources Website: bit.ly/GameRTWebsite Zotero: https://bit.ly/GameRTZotero Questions? Email gamert@ala.org

