“Were You Paying Attention?!” by Beth and Angel Make Games
Were You Paying Attention?! is a game about, well, paying attention! It's a reminder that paying attention has a literal cost —focus— and that it's important not to overtax listeners
with too much information. How do you learn that, you ask? By overwhelming your opponents with information, of course! This is a competitive world, and the only way to win is for everyone else to lose,
obviously. Watch the VOD of this session here: https://www.twitch.tv/collections/tpuBAP2vGhcF7A The Game “Were You Paying Attention?!” by Beth and Angel Make Games. Bundle Information: For the last few hours of Friday 4/7/2023 Were you Paying Attention?! is a part of the TTRPGs for Trans Rights in Florida! over on itch.io. You can purchase it along with 505 other games for $5 and support both Zebra Youth and Transinclusive Group,“two charities that work directly with trans folx on the ground in Florida, to get the most direct aid to those who need it most.”

Play Alikes ● TTRPGs ○ Fiasco, Bully Pulpit Games ○ Epitaph, Less Than Three GAmes ○ Stealing Stories, Monte Cook Games ● Board Games ○ Cameleon, Big Potato Games ○ Codenames, Czech Games ○ Decrypto, Le Scorpion Masqué ○ Fake Artist Goes to New York, Oink Games ○ Hanabi, RNR Games ○ The Moth Presents: A Game of Storytelling ○ Sounds Fishy, Big Potato Games ○ Telestrations, The Op (USAOPOLY) ○ Wavelength: Tabletop & Mobile ○ Word Slam, Brädspel.se, KOSMOS ○ Mechanism lists on BoardGameGeek: Communication Limits, Memory, Storytelling
Read Alikes ● How to Tell a Story by Meg Bowles, Catherine Burns, & et. al. ● Long Story Short by Margot Leitman ● Out on the Wire by Jessica Abel ● The Science of Storytelling by Will Storr
Website Articles ● Alphabet Improv Game ● The Bardic Inquiry - Cognitive Load Theory in Roleplaying Games ● The Moth | Storytelling Tips & Tricks ● Seven Principles of Storytelling - Roleplaying Tips
Safety Tools ● Script Change by Beau Jágr Sheldon ● The Door is Open by Eirik Fatland ○ Blog by Lizzie Stark ○ Blog 2 by Eirik Fatland ● TTRPG Safety Toolkit collected by Kienna Shaw and Lauren Bryant-Monk ○ TTRPG Safety Toolkit Guide ○ Google Drive

Game RT Twitch Policy 1. Be kind and respectful to one another 2. Hate speech of any type will not be tolerated 3. We reserve the right to remove anyone from the chat for any reason 4. If you are feeling harassed by anyone, please notify a GameRT twitch mod and one of us will assist you 5. If you'd rather talk privately about anything, please send us a direct message
Learn More About GameRT Blog: bit.ly/GameRTBlog Facebook: bit.ly/GameRTLeague & bit.ly/GameRTFacebook Resources: bit.ly/GameRTPublicResources Website: bit.ly/GameRTWebsite Questions? Email gamert@ala.org

