‘The best way to learn is just to play’
Welcome to a broad and eclectic issue of JIL that features advances in information literacy knowledge and understanding from a whole range of backgrounds!
Our mission is to push the boundaries of information literacy thinking in theory, practice and method, and to develop deep and critical understandings of IL not just in academia and formal educational environments, but in everyday contexts too. This issue features peer-reviewed research from the public and school library spheres and an investigation of informal learning practices in gaming, as well as explorations of IL in higher education settings.
Library staff members’ learning and development also features, with lively write-ups from both LILAC and ALDinHE. Hannah Slater is ‘tired but inspired’ after a stimulating LILAC experience, and vows to build an engaged and reflective practice on a solid critical foundation. Find out why she thinks it might get messy in her engaging conference diary!
Gemma Pearce spoke to the five LILAC bursary winners about what they would be taking away from their experience. Their replies span the gamut of professional and social issues, from imposter syndrome and professional identity, through the importance of reading, to fake news and social justice. You can read about the insights that Baljinder, Sarah, YiWen, Neena and Ros attained at LILAC, and how they will each influence the profession as a consequence, in Gemma’s interviews.
The Association of Learning Developers’ annual conference also offers plenty of stimulus for the teaching librarian. If you haven’t yet discovered this vibrant and supportive community, let Bryony Parsons tell you why ALDinHE is ‘the perfect ice-breaker’ for getting to know how learning development complements information literacy. Finally, Kirsten McCormick reports from the ‘Learning Information Literacy across the Globe’ conference, a dissemination event associated with an exciting new Erasmus+ project to develop an IL MOOC. This international initiative has already produced a number of valuable outputs in addition to the course itself, and you can find out about them all in Kirsten’s report.
As always, this issue contains plenty of innovative ideas that can be adopted into IL teaching practice and tried out right away. In our Project Reports section, Joanna Hare and Kimburley Choi describe the design and implementation of a flipped workshop specifically supporting students’ understanding of how to cite and attribute non-textual artefacts. With a strong professional practice orientation, the design of this workshop is intended to equip creative arts students with a deep understanding of values and implications around attribution not only at university, but in their careers as creative practitioners.
In the same section, Aidan Tolland, Rebecca Mogg and Amanda Bennett report on their use of learning diaries to evaluate the success of a set of online, asynchronous IL tutorials for postgraduate taught students. This new approach to evaluating course design, content and impact deliberately invites participants to reflect on the relationship between the tutorials and their previous learning, and emphasises the perspective of the individual. By using learning diaries to elicit individual reflections, the authors avoided the danger of ‘groupthink’ or the pressure to reach a consensus that can characterise the focus group as a means of course evaluation, as well as offering learners an opportunity to join the dots between the IL provision and the rest of their learning experience.
Rachel Bickley, Craig McEwan and Ella Taylor offer a trio of readable, informative and enjoyable reviews of recent IL books. They find that all three volumes offer useful and practical insights into their subjects, balancing accessible introductions to the theoretical aspects with workable suggestions for practice. All three reviews give an excellent insight into not only the

Coonan. 2019. Journal of Information Literacy, 13(1).

http://dx.doi.org/10.11645/13.1.2648

1

individual book, but its wider context and background – a great way for the time-pressed library staff member to stay up to date with recent developments.
In our peer-reviewed papers section, I’m very pleased that colleagues from my current university, Anglia Ruskin, have contributed an engaging paper on academics’ perceptions of information literacy. They focus particularly on two key discipline areas – nursing and business – and explore connections between disciplinary practice and how IL is seen by academics in each subject. Once again the authors move beyond the academic sphere, making strong links to how information and evaluative practices will manifest in the students’ future workplaces and their importance for cultivating ‘social capital’ as a professional.
At the other end of the educational spectrum, Bartlomiej Lenart and Carla Lewis offer a fascinating reappraisal of the ‘Philosophy for Children’ approach, exploring how it complements and potentially extends public libraries’ storytime provision. P4C employs a constructivist and connectivist approach in which the teacher acts as a facilitator and children work together to carry out inquiry-based learning. By aiming to help children develop strategies for independent critical thinking, rather than prescribing formulae for navigating an information-dense world, the approach once again seeks to create social and intellectual capital, and the authors strive to revision libraries not as repositories of information but as places of civic discourse.
This persistent movement beyond the library walls, towards the ‘everyday’ spaces in which individuals interact, mimic, share, and co-create knowledge, is most visible in Carlos Scolari and Ruth Contreras-Espinosa’s exploration of informal learning practices in videogaming. This paper investigates transmedia literacy, the always-evolving media and information practices of game players taking place outside formal institutions, and shows how many aspects of these practices dovetail with information literacy - from problem-solving and identity performance through to navigating, networking and negotiating. The authors suggest that what may appear on the surface to be highly contextual technical skills have a social and cognitive application well beyond the sphere of videogaming.
Perhaps most importantly, their research emphasises yet again that learning is not practice for doing or preparation for living, but the living and doing itself: as one of their interviewees comments, ‘The best way to learn is just to play’.

Coonan. 2019. Journal of Information Literacy, 13(1).

http://dx.doi.org/10.11645/13.1.2648

2

Copyright for the article content resides with the authors, and copyright for the publication layout resides with the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals, Information Literacy Group. These Copyright holders have agreed that this article should be available on Open access and licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike license.

