VIRTUAL REALITY
VIRTUAL REALITY
IN PUBLIC LIBRARIES
Negin Dahya, Jin Ha Lee, Kung Jin Lee, W.E. King, Megha Goel, and Hekma Yassin
University of Washington Information School
Original illustrations courtesy of Pixabay
Adapted by Julianne Peeling, University of Washington

CONTENTS
Introduction ...........................................................................................2
Survey results ........................................................................................3
Perceptions & beliefs about virtual reality .............................................4
VR experiences: Immersion & learning .................................................7
VR, games, & video gaming culture & industry .....................................10
Engaged communities: Patron identities & demographics  ..................11
Libraries: Practices & programming ......................................................14
Future work............................................................................................17
This research was generously funded by Washington State Libraries, Office of the Secretary of State, and Oculus.
The Information School,  
Box 352840, Mary Gates Hall, Ste. 370,  
Seattle, WA 98195-2840
Proposed reference:
Dahya, N., Lee, J.H., Lee, K.J., King, W.E., Goel, M., & Yassin, H. (2019). Virtual reality in public libraries. Retrieved from   
  https://ischool.uw.edu/vrinlibraries

1
Virtual Reality in Public Libraries
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
(1) Patrons and librarians carried preexisting and 
often persistent perceptions and beliefs about 
virtual reality. These beliefs were distinct from 
their actual experiences with VR in the library.
• Research participants believe that VR is a tool to 
support learning, empathy, and engagement.
• Librarians and patrons alike believe that VR is an ex-
pensive piece of technology that is not yet a necessity.
• Some participants expressed concerns about poten-
tially negative impacts of VR on physical and mental 
health.
• Research participants had limited ideas about VR as a 
tool for social engagement.
(2) Patron and librarian experiences with VR 
programs centered on immersion and learning 
about VR technology. 
• Patrons overall had positive experiences with VR.
• Many patrons experienced an intense sense of 
immersion described as being transported to a 
different world.
• Some felt disorientation, specifically with the duality 
of how real and simultaneously unreal the VR 
experience can be.
• Some VR experiences can cause disorientation or 
dizziness.
• VR inspired curiosity to learn.
• Patrons learned more about VR technology than VR 
content.
• Patrons had a range of opinions regarding the ease of 
using VR.
(3) There were various connections made between 
VR and video games by patrons and librarians. 
• Many patrons saw VR as an extension of video games, 
with a few new qualities.
• Patrons and librarians had mixed feelings about VR 
as a social tool, sometimes imagining it as a tool 
for social engagement and other times for social 
isolation.
• Existing gender and racial divisions in video gaming 
surfaced in relation to who used VR and how people 
perceived VR users.
(4) Patron demographics and identities were 
examined to understand if and how VR could 
support equity and access to this technology. 
• White boys and men, as well as video game players, 
often tried VR in the libraries.
• More research may be needed to understand the 
value of VR for non-White communities.
• VR is believed to be a strong tool for social equity 
without clear supporting evidence.
• We had few chances to test VR’s capacity to interrupt 
marginalization of ethnoracial minorities using VR 
programs.
• We need to carefully consider the complexity of 
class and how people are imagining the value of 
VR, particularly with regard to accepting VR as a 
replacement for reality in the face of poverty.
• VR’s impact on individuals with disabilities varied 
significantly and requires additional support from 
librarians.
(5) Through this study, we identified a number 
of practical and programmatic findings to inform 
future VR library programs. 
• The belief that VR is more for teens and “techie” 
people and “probably not for me” was broken down 
when a new patron tried VR.
• Librarians require ample time and planning to put 
together good quality VR programs.
• The age restriction (13+) was disappointing for 
tweens, and other activities are important to maintain 
their engagement while waiting for friends or siblings. 
• The physical space where VR is set up can have an 
impact on program success and recruitment; librarians 
need to think carefully about space, privacy, sound, 
and visibility.
• A thoughtful promotion and outreach plan that 
informs the public about why they should be 
interested in VR is important to garner public interest.

2
Virtual Reality in Public Libraries
V
irtual reality (VR) has been envisioned as a tool for 
learning—from job skills training to exploring the 
human body and outer space—as a means of youth 
engagement and as an opportunity to defy the rules 
and consequences of the real world. VR has also been 
described as a technology that can bring people together 
across geographic boundaries, revolutionize common 
workplace practices such as meetings, and enhance formal 
education and learning. At the same time, VR is seen as 
an elite, cutting-edge technology not yet available to the 
masses. Public libraries are key locations for making VR 
technology more accessible to the public, exploring its role 
in supporting community engagement, and understanding 
its potential to offer informal as well as more structured 
learning opportunities. In 2018, Washington State Libraries, 
the VR technology company Oculus, and the University of 
Washington Information School came together to explore 
the role of VR technology in the public library. 
To understand the role of VR in library education programs, 
researchers from the University of Washington conducted 
a study in Washington state public libraries. The goal of the 
project was to better understand the impact of offering VR 
in public libraries, with a focus on community engagement 
and informal learning. We conducted a case study of seven 
library sites using qualitative research and mixed methods 
to understand the meanings librarians and patrons associate 
with VR and learning in the context of libraries, including 
their perceptions of the potential uses of VR, as well as why 
they think it is important to have VR in libraries. Participating 
libraries include King County Library System (Federal Way; 
Tukwila), Mount Vernon City Library, Puyallup Public Library, 
Richland Public Library, and Timberland Regional Library 
(Shelton; Hoquiam). Each library was responsible for its 
own programming, and Oculus provided a suggested list of 
educational games and experiences that were freely avail-
able. The field sites chosen reflect the diversity and variety 
of libraries in the state, and include urban sites as well as 
regional and rural sites.
We interviewed 23 librarians at the start and end of the 
project (36 interviews total) from participating sites, 
including those who were involved in the day-to-day VR 
programming and a few in administrative roles who were 
not directly involved in facilitating VR experiences but had 
some goals or visions of how VR might be used in each li-
brary. Approximately 400 patrons experienced VR through-
out the study period, with some patrons coming back to try 
VR as many as five times. After experiencing VR, patrons 
were invited to complete an online survey and participate 
in an interview with one of the researchers. We collected 
185 survey responses and interviewed 39 patrons. We 
conducted site visits from March 2018 through June 2018 
to observe patrons using VR and the overall structure of 
the programs. In this report, we present a summary of our 
research findings as well as practical recommendations for 
public librarians who are interested in offering access to VR 
technologies in their libraries.
INTRODUCTION


3
Virtual Reality in Public Libraries
SURVEY RESULTS
A
fter experiencing VR, 185 pa-
trons completed a survey about 
their experience. All seven 
libraries offered patrons the opportu-
nity to complete the survey, with 28% 
of responses collected from Hoquiam, 
19% from Puyallup, 16% from Tukwi-
la, and less than 10% of total survey 
respondents from each of the other li-
brary sites. The higher response rates 
from Hoquiam, Puyallup, and Tukwila 
are likely attributed to a variety of 
factors, including programming and 
library location. 
There were slightly more males (53%) than females (45%) 
who took the survey, while two percent identified as 
having non-binary gender identities or wrote in a custom 
gender identity. Of the survey responses, 60% were from 
teens and people in their 20s, with 12% of respondents in 
their 30s, nine percent in their 40s, eight percent in their 
50s, and 10% in their 60s and above. We invited survey 
respondents to self-identify their ethnoracial designation, 
and responses included more than half identifying as 
White (69%), followed by Hispanic (13%), Asian (7%), 
Indigenous (6%), African American (5%), or mixed (10%). 
These demographics align closely with population trends 
of the state, which reports that the Hispanic/Latino popu-
lation has reached 13.1% of the population in 2018 and 
8.8% identify as Asian.1
The majority of the survey respondents (81.6%) reported 
that they play video games, with around 35% playing 
games almost every day or a few times a week. In our 
interviews, we inquired about video games further and 
discuss our findings in the section on VR, games, and 
video gaming culture. 
The respondents stated that the librarians were the stron-
1 State population statistics from https://www.ofm.wa.gov/washington-data-research/statewide-data/washington-trends/population-changes/
population-race.
gest factor for bringing people into the library VR pro-
grams (41%) followed by seeing other people playing VR 
(35%). Flyers, posters, word of mouth, and online informa-
tion were noted as other forms that brought respondents 
to the libraries to use VR. 
Nearly everyone surveyed (99%) reported that they en-
joyed their VR experience at the library, with 84% reporting 
that they “really enjoyed it.” This is consistent with our 
interview findings that most research participants were 
excited about using VR. The most used application was 
First Contact, which we recommended because it is highly 
interactive and offers a smooth learning process for first-
time users. Among the respondents, 69% were first-time 
users, with 31% having tried VR before. 
From their VR experience at the library, 97% of respon-
dents reported that they learned about using VR technol-
ogy and 78% learned about the content of the VR experi-
ence (i.e., topic of the game or experience). However, our 
findings from patron and librarian interviews complicate 
these survey results and are discussed throughout this 
report. Overwhelmingly, survey respondents were in favor 
of continuing VR programming at their library.


4
Virtual Reality in Public Libraries
I
n our study we asked librarians and patrons for their 
thoughts on VR in regard to how they might use the 
current technology and what they envision VR could 
or could not do. The conversations revealed our research 
participants’ perceptions of the technology, including 
informed speculations about cost and prevalence, imag-
ined possibilities for learning, and concerns about mental 
health. 
Perceptions about learning, empathy,  
and engagement through VR.
Research participants expressed strong interest and hope in 
the possibilities VR might afford in the future, even though 
the actual experiences of librarians and patrons throughout 
this study did not directly support many of these interests 
and hopes. For example, many research participants dis-
cussed their beliefs about developing empathy and engag-
ing in empathy-building experiences through VR. 
Research participants talked about how people could visit 
war zones, refugee camps, and understand the perspective 
of people with autism through VR, although these types 
of VR experiences were not part of those provided to the 
libraries in this study. Some librarians described how 
engaging in these types of programs could serve as a foun-
dation to expanding someone’s knowledge and empathy. 
Our research shows no clear evidence of empathy building 
through the type of drop-in and short-program VR engage-
ments that were available in the library. Additionally, we 
note that there lacks a clear definition of what constitutes 
PERCEPTIONS &  
BELIEFS ABOUT  
VIRTUAL REALITY
“
”
I would say it’d be a wonderful 
idea to have someone experience 
another person’s life through 
their eyes … ‘This is how I’m 
living my life.’ 
       — Library patron

5
Virtual Reality in Public Libraries
empathy and empathy building across participants inter-
ested in this conversation. We engage further in discussion 
about this through the findings on learning, considering 
patron self-reports about what they learned (or did not 
learn) through their VR experiences.  
Many research participants also talked about VR being 
used as an additional tool for school-aged students to do 
school work. Others considered VR as a therapeutic tool to 
escape from reality and simulate a calming environment. 
Some speculated on how the tool could have a practical 
use for job training (e.g., building a car or practicing 
surgery). Research participants carried strong beliefs that 
the “virtual” nature of VR experiences could create a “safe 
space” where a person might practice skills in an environ-
ment that is forgiving of failure. 
Most research participants—especially first time VR users— 
were amazed by the immersive and interactive experience 
that VR can provide and focused on how VR could help 
overcome constraints related to time, money, and physical 
limitations. The idea that people could visit a different loca-
tion in the world through VR fascinated people. Addition-
ally, visiting places such as outer space, underwater, and 
inside the body, as well as fictional or imagined places, 
was mentioned by research participants as something peo-
ple would likely enjoy and from which they might benefit. 
Finally, some research participants imagined VR being 
used to support accessibility; for instance, by allowing 
senior populations with various motor impairments to 
be able to visit familiar places in VR. These many hopes 
and imaginings about the possibilities for VR were strong 
among research participants after their use of VR even if 
the programs they were able to try did not engage them in 
something therapeutic, in a training program, or in ways 
that defied the realities of their physical mobility. We want 
to highlight here that there is a gap between what people 
believe VR is capable of and what they actually experi-
enced in VR in the library.
An expensive piece of technology,  
not yet a necessity.
Research participants frequently commented on the 
perceived costs of VR technology. For the majority of 
participants, VR was still seen as an expensive piece of 
technology and a luxury item as opposed to a necessity. 
This was true among people who felt that the technology 
cost $150 and those who thought it cost over $1,000. 
Interestingly, many people did speculate about VR be-
coming more pervasive in the not-so-distant future. While 
patrons acknowledged that free access to VR in the library 
is important for people who can’t afford it, many still ques-
tioned why they should try it now.  The social value and 
purpose of VR in the public eye are still unclear. Librarians 
were also concerned about the required maintenance of 
the technology—such as constant updates and the need to 
purchase newer platforms—and both librarians and patrons 
questioned if the novelty of the experience would wear off 
over time. 
 
Concerns about potentially negative  
impact on physical and mental health.
Despite the many positive outcomes research participants 
imagined for VR technology, there were also several 


6
Virtual Reality in Public Libraries
worries. One major concern was about the impact VR could 
have on physical and mental health. Regarding physical 
health, patrons were concerned that prolonged use of VR 
could have negative impact on vision and that even min-
imal use might cause nausea or seizures. Some librarians 
and patrons were worried that VR could make people more 
anti-social and that the virtual experiences could be so 
engrossing that people might become removed from the 
real world as they spent more time in VR.  
Research participants commented on the importance of 
real, physical, lived experiences, and expressed hesitation 
about VR becoming a replacement. In these ways, there 
was a certain amount of ambivalence in librarian and 
patron perceptions about what VR could and could not do 
for learning and community engagement, and in relation 
to social life. 
Limited perceptions and ideas  
about VR and social engagement. 
Librarians and patrons largely believed that VR could be a 
powerful social tool to connect with others around shared 
interests and across geography. Generally, perceptions 
about VR’s social capacity were positive, especially for 
getting young people involved. These discussions with 
librarians and patrons were focused on using existing VR 
experiences, sometimes together in a shared VR environ-
ment. There was no discussion about the social potential 
of co-creating VR programs or co-designing art using 
programs such as Quill (3D illustration) or Medium (3D 
sculpting). We make note of this to expand the purview of 
what is possible in regard to social engagements and VR. 
In interviews, librarians and patrons also expressed an 
interest in exploring different communities and expe -
riences through VR to garner richer perspectives about 
the world. This includes the idea of “walking in someone 
else’s shoes.” Much like the idea of building empathy, 
this perception or belief about VR’s role in shared and 
sharing experiences is complex. The depth of consider -
ation for what it might mean to “walk in someone else’s 
shoes” or how to ensure that happens meaningfully and 
responsibly was not widely discussed in interviews for 
this study and warrants further attention when discuss -
ing this possibility in the future of VR. The actual social 
experiences of patrons using VR in the library opens the 
following section on patron experiences.


7
Virtual Reality in Public Libraries
I
n our analysis of library site visits and observations 
along with survey data and interviews, we distinguished 
between participants’ statements of their perceptions, 
ideas, and beliefs about VR and their actual VR experi-
ences in the library. These findings about people’s actual 
experiences are organized under sub-themes related to 
social engagements, experiences of immersion in virtual 
worlds, learning, and video gaming. They are presented 
following the preceding section on perceptions and beliefs 
to contrast how people thought about VR with how they 
experienced it. 
Patron engagements around VR experiences. 
The actual social experiences of patrons with VR were fair -
ly clear. In some cases, particularly among youth patrons, 
social interactions around and about VR were influenced 
by preexisting social dynamics of the group coming into 
the library. If a group of friends came into the library 
together, they typically either all did or all did not try the 
technology. At the same time, when people did try VR, 
it generated some conversation around that experience 
for spectators, including among people who might not 
otherwise have talked to one another. People responded 
and reacted to what was happening in VR, as shown on 
an outward-facing display screen, and onlookers had fun 
interacting with and around the person in VR. This social 
engagement was described as a happy surprise to patrons 
and librarians. Many people also commented on the indi -
vidual and isolating experience of being a single VR user 
and of being watched while in VR, where you cannot see 
the people around you. Although this sensation generat -
ed some discomfort for certain patrons, overall they still 
VR EXPERIENCES:  
IMMERSION  
& LEARNING

8
Virtual Reality in Public Libraries
expressed that the benefits of having VR in a public space 
where people could get interested in and chat about the 
experiences outweighed feelings of self-consciousness. 
Intense immersion and being  
transported to a different world.
One of the unique qualities of the VR experience is pro-
viding people an opportunity to forget the world around 
them, if only for a moment, and to engage, remember, 
or learn something through a more intense and visceral 
experience. Research participants reported having a strong 
sense of immersion during their VR experience, describing 
their sensation as “feeling like it was real” or “feeling as if 
they were really there.” 
In addition to immersion, interactivity in VR was often 
mentioned as a favorite element of the experience, with 
many patrons preferring simulations where they could 
touch or control objects and interact with the environment in 
some way rather than simply watching or following a story. 
In some cases, this ability allowed research participants to 
imagine themselves in a completely different situation from 
their reality, such as one patron who was in a wheelchair 
describing her feeling as if she could get up and walk. 
A few VR users expressed having a sense of empowerment 
or ownership over the virtual world, being in a space where 
they could have control and could imagine being able to 
do anything. Some suggested interesting ideas for using 
VR for social engagement, such as sharing their past travel 
experiences with other people by showing the places they 
had visited in a VR app such as Google Earth. 
Feelings of disorientation:  
Real but not completely real. 
Some research participants reported duality and frag-
mentation in their VR experience; patrons expressed a 
sense of wonder at how real the experiences felt and were 
simultaneously aware that what they were experiencing 
was not real. In some cases, people felt confused when 
their interaction with virtual objects did not align with their 
real-world expectations, such as when patrons could walk 
through virtual objects. A few participants talked about 
having to remind themselves that what they were experi-
encing was not real, despite the multisensory and immer-
sive VR experience, resulting in a bit of disorientation. 
Learning experiences:  
VR inspired curiosity to learn.
VR in the public space gives patrons the opportunity to 
become familiar with the technology. The most significant 
accounts of learning came from repeat patrons, who were 
able to master skills, gain more knowledge of controls, and 
recollect specific content from the VR experience. Notably, 
there was more learning about the technology, including 
how to use it, than about the content of the VR experienc-
es. Learning about the technology inspired curiosity about 
what kind of VR experiences are available as well as about 
the VR industry overall, including developing VR apps. 
Whether wearing the VR headset or watching others using 
VR, patrons were learning from one another and helping 
one another navigate these immersive experiences. 
A challenge to documenting learning outcomes from 
these VR experiences relates to patrons not going into VR 
experiences with the goal or expectation to learn, as well 
as librarians not approaching their own programming with 
specific learning outcomes in mind. Introductory programs 
such as First Contact and Dreamdeck afforded patrons 
opportunities to learn how to use VR and navigate a VR 
environment, while other programs available through the 
pilot study offered experiences to learn specific content, 
such as exploring the ocean through Ocean Rift, learning 
about the inner body in Body VR, and journeying to outer 
space with Star Chart. 
My daughter, she did the Google Earth, and she was looking at 
a village in Tuscany, and stuff like that, and she's like, ‘Oh, Mom. 
You know, that makes me wanna go to Europe that much more.’ 
And I may not be able to take her to Europe, but through VR, she 
might be able to experience it a little bit.
— Library patron 
“
”

9
Virtual Reality in Public Libraries
In any educational programming, if learning is indeed the 
goal, having clear learning outcomes and a structured pro-
cess for teaching and learning engagements (curriculum 
and pedagogy) is important. With that in mind, however, 
we also note that there is value in patrons learning about 
VR technology itself. Formal or prescriptive learning 
related to specific subjects or content does not need to 
be the focus of VR programming in the library to make 
it worthwhile. The question remains, perhaps, as to what 
exactly libraries want to promote as the value of this tool 
and these programs for patrons where many possibilities 
abound.   
Differing opinions on ease of use.
Some users reported that having VR in libraries presented 
a low barrier of use due to the technology’s easy access 
in the public space. Other patrons perceived VR to have a 
high barrier of use due to the learning curve the technol-
ogy itself presented. Although some found it to be as easy 
as putting on the headset and watching a video, others 
found that they had to learn how to use the controls and 
get used to the environment, and overall found it not to 
be “the right natural movement.” There was a strong belief 
that VR is a gaming tool and therefore an easier tech-
nology for gamers to get accustomed to—for example, in 
learning the controls. 
Emotional responses and physical reactions: 
More hesitant of using VR before than after.
VR was seen as a new technology inducing fear or anxiety 
for some patrons before and during their experiences. A 
few patrons expressed anxiety about physically running 
into people around them, whom they could not see while 
they were in VR. Others were frightened by the content of 
the Dreamdeck experience, which offered short VR scenes 
including a simulation of standing at the top of a tall build-
ing as well as being chased by a T-Rex dinosaur. Librarians 
were aware of this subject matter and were trained to 
inform patrons about it beforehand. Some patrons who 
were anxious about trying VR often became less anxious as 
they watched others. 
Some VR experiences can cause  
disorientation or dizziness. 
Concerns about physical reactions were founded. Some 
research participants reported falling down, running into 
people, or experiencing dizziness or nausea. A few partici-
pants mentioned feeling disoriented and had to sit down 
or leave the experience. All VR participants were given a 
waiver to sign that informed them of the risks of participa-
tion before they tried VR, and librarians also gave verbal 
instructions and warnings about specific content, especial-
ly for users who expressed concerns.
Most patrons were excited  
about their VR experience.
Librarians noted that initially there were fewer people 
“lining up” and excited to try VR than they expected. Even 
so, most patrons who did try VR reported some level of 
enthusiasm and amazement. Most users wanted to share 
their excitement about VR by inviting friends and family to 
try it for themselves. Others wanted to come back and use 
it again and a few asked about how they could purchase 
VR equipment for themselves.


10
Virtual Reality in Public Libraries
Patrons saw VR as an  
extension of video games.
For many patrons and librarians, VR’s use was often 
associated with a game console such as a Nintendo Wii or 
a PlayStation rather than with a computer or an iPad. Some 
raised concerns about the VR gear becoming outdated as 
quickly as other gaming consoles, and questioned how 
often they would have to purchase updated gear, how 
long they would be able to use the current model, how 
long companies would provide the updates and continue 
to support it, and how much backward compatibility the 
software might have. Librarians also were uncertain if 
VR would become something more or different than yet 
another gaming console. Several participants expressed 
disappointments about how educational games are 
typically just not fun to play and therefore not appealing. 
Some believed that perhaps VR games in the future might 
be more interactive and could support multi-users, to 
make such games more enjoyable. Some also tried to 
imagine how their favorite video games might look in the 
VR environment. 
Patrons had mixed feelings  
about VR as a social tool. 
There were mixed opinions on the effectiveness of video 
games and VR—sometimes seen as an extension of video 
games—as social tools. Some valued the potential of video 
games to bring people with shared interests together and 
imagined how these experiences could look in VR, such 
as gathering with friends and watching videos inside the 
VR environment. Others questioned if engagement with 
video games, and especially in VR, would intensify anti-so-
cial behavior by taking away time from interactions with 
people in real life. Some parents, who said they perceived 
video games to be isolating children as they become more 
screen focused and addicted to gaming, preferred them 
to experience things in real life rather than inside a video 
game, and worried that VR might exacerbate isolation. 
VR, GAMES, & VIDEO 
GAMING CULTURE  
& INDUSTRY


11
Virtual Reality in Public Libraries
I
n our research we identified differences between percep-
tions about who would most enjoy VR and who actually 
used VR in the library programs. These perceptions 
about users and the evidence about engagement in the VR 
programs were fairly well aligned, particularly in regard to 
young people, who did show enthusiasm for using VR. Sur-
prising to many librarians was that senior library patrons 
who tried VR also enjoyed it.
Boys and men as well as video game  
players tried VR in the libraries often.
Patrons and librarians alike believed that boys and men as 
well as people with experience playing video games would 
be most interested in using VR. This proved to be true, 
and our research shows that experience with video games 
and self-identifying as a video game player were often 
defining characteristics of people using VR in the library. 
Girls who tried VR also enjoyed it, but fewer girls than boys 
expressed interest in engaging with the library VR pro-
grams. Librarians noted that patrons with previous gaming 
experience using other consoles were more likely to want 
to try the VR in the library. These observations surfaced 
some obvious concerns related to access and equity in a 
video gaming landscape, where the stereotypical image 
of a video game player remains white and male (despite 
statistics not supporting this reality in the gaming world, 
with more gamers who are female and people of color).2 
Some also expressed very stereotypical ideas about what 
male versus female game players prefer, such as the no-
tions that boys like shooting things and girls like exploring 
things; however, our actual user data based on observation 
and interviews did not support these assumptions at all.  
ENGAGED  
COMMUNITIES:  
PATRON IDENTITIES 
& DEMOGRAPHICS
2 2019 Sales, Demographic, and Usage Data. Essential Facts about the Computer and Video Game Industry. Entertainment Software 
Association. http://www.theesa.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/EF2018_FINAL.pdf

12
Virtual Reality in Public Libraries
More research needed to understand the  
value of VR for non-White communities. 
According to librarian interviews and patron survey data, 
the majority of patrons using VR in the library during 
this study period were White. One exception was at the 
Tukwila Public Library, which serves a patron population 
comprising predominantly non-White communities, both 
long-standing American people of color and more recent 
immigrants and refugees. In this case, it is important to 
note that VR programs were highly successful and that the 
case study of Tukwila suggests that VR programs were sim-
ply of interest to the most prominent and regular existing 
library patrons.
Some librarians noted that they struggled to get non-White 
communities, especially new immigrants and refugees, into 
the library altogether. Some also expressed a belief that 
immigrant and refugee families do not necessarily see the 
value in VR for themselves or their children. Importantly, 
signing legal waivers of use and research consent forms 
may have been a barrier to participation. Our study team did 
translate research documents into Somali, Russian, Korean, 
and Spanish to mitigate this problem, though only a few 
research forms in these languages were returned to us.
Few chances to test VR’s capacity to interrupt 
marginalization of ethnoracial minorities. 
Many librarians and some patrons believed that VR tech-
nology could be used to share experiences and broaden 
the view of White and/or Western-centric people through 
VR experiences about other places, cultures, or by “walking 
in someone else’s shoes” . Other interesting ideas included 
immigrant communities using VR to visit their homelands 
and share a more immersive view of their worlds. None 
of these ideas were explored through the experiences 
available, and with few non-White patrons, there was no 
opportunity to study these ideas. Our review of existing lit-
erature also suggests more research in this area is needed 
to identify if these types of equity-oriented ideas can be 
realized. 
Complex considerations related to class  
and the value of accessing VR in the library. 
Making VR available through the public library was, from 
the outset, intended to be an access and equity project. 
This project was in service of those community members 
who might not otherwise have exposure to VR through 
their social and professional networks, and for those who 
cannot afford to purchase a VR system. 
Findings from this study complicate this effort in several 
ways. Patrons were excited about using VR to travel and 
have experiences otherwise unavailable to them from 
the standpoint of access to resources. Yet critical discus-
sions about the limits of such an alternative to physically 
traveling the world were overlooked. The use of Google 
Earth to “travel” was very popular. However, there were no 
examples of people questioning how these experiences 
are designed and curated by their corporate creators (i.e., 


13
Virtual Reality in Public Libraries
Google). There was also a seeming acceptance of wealth 
inequality and lack of opportunity as the inevitable future, 
with VR being the answer to this growing gap. 
 VR’s impact on individuals  
with disabilities varied significantly. 
Findings on the use of VR for people with differing physical 
and cognitive abilities were complex. Librarians believed 
that people with motor impairments could benefit from 
VR experiences such as climbing Everest or traveling the 
world. One example of this was documented in a library 
program where a patron in a wheelchair and with limited 
hand and arm mobility was enthralled by her VR experi-
ence. In this case, it should be noted that the librarian used 
the hand controls on behalf of the patron who wore the 
headset, highlighting the importance of a collaborative, 
supported experience. In a different library and observa-
tion, a group of young people with cognitive disabilities 
ranging from autism to Down syndrome came to the 
library to try VR. Some enjoyed it, but others pulled off the 
headset immediately. 
Belief that VR could support learning for 
people with nontraditional learning styles. 
Librarians and patrons believed that VR could support 
learning for individuals with nontraditional learning 
styles—those who are not inclined to sit in a classroom or 
learn from a book. As noted, learning VR content was not 
clearly evidenced in this study, and we additionally note 
that learning styles and multimedia content were typically 
discussed in novice terms. For example, librarians and 
patrons talked about experiential learning and hands-on 
learning but about neither curriculum nor pedagogy. 
More information about what experiential learning and 
hands-on learning mean, what kind of models exist, and 
for whom they are successful would benefit librarians in 
particular, who are educators but have varying degrees of 
training in education and instructional design.
I definitely saw more excitement with learning through VR, both 
from the teens and adults. From adults especially, I heard multiple 
times that, ‘If this had been around when I was in school, I would 
have done so much better.’
 — Librarian
“ ”

14
Virtual Reality in Public Libraries
LIBRARIES: PRACTICES 
& PROGRAMMING
T
he inclusion of virtual 
reality programming in 
the public library came 
with a range of noteworthy 
administrative, practical, and 
programming considerations. 
The first series of lessons 
learned is related to coordinat-
ing VR programming. This can 
be summarized in relation to 
planning, use of library space, 
and time. 
Time and planning 
to prepare VR 
programming  
and experiences. 
Planning for VR requires a sig-
nificant amount of preparatory 
time, ranging from librarians 
having time to play with the 
VR machine and available 
games and experiences, to 
librarians having time to cre-
atively explore programming 
ideas with several months of 
lead time. Librarians indicated wanting more freedom to 
engage with VR and to think about valuable and relevant 
opportunities for patron engagement. 
Time was also a factor in regard to patron access, where 
in some cases more time for deeper engagement with a 
VR experience was wanted. Librarians expressed the need 
for significant lead time and preparation to ensure that 
the program would be well staffed, the technology would 
be updated, and that if legal waivers of use were in place 
they could be distributed and 
collected. This last concern 
is especially important for 
underage participants, as 
libraries want to secure 
parental permission for their 
participation. 
Age restrictions, 
learning VR,  
and inclusion  
for tweens. 
Interestingly, some of this 
preparatory time might be 
spent learning about VR 
technology including its 
risks and implications for use 
among children under the 
age of 13, as questions often 
surfaced about the age limit, 
with few answers from the 
librarians. Study results show 
that librarians and patrons 
were frustrated and disap -
pointed by the age restriction, 
which is set by Oculus (and 
is similar for other comparable VR platforms). Few of our 
interview participants addressed or inquired about why 
this rule was in place, specifically as it related to the visual 
and cognitive development of children and tweens. More 
time to learn about VR for participating librarians might 
strengthen the comfort level and successful planning and 
delivery of VR programming in a way that could establish 
better responses to questions about the age restriction 
and allow for strong wrap-around programming to enter -
tain underage patrons. 
VR was able to introduce 
the idea that ... there’s so 
much available from the 
library. So in some cases, 
experiencing VR, I think, 
kind of provided a jump-
start to patrons’ curiosity, 
and a thirst for knowledge. 
And the VR experience 
has inspired them to ask 
questions, to find out what 
types of resources they can 
engage with, and has given 
them a bit of confidence in 
their ability to engage in 
the library world.       
           — Librarian
“
“

15
Virtual Reality in Public Libraries
Space can have an impact  
on program success and recruitment. 
Deliberate planning regarding the use of library space is also 
an important aspect of developing strong VR programming. 
For example, librarians had to consider the location of the VR 
setup carefully, ensuring enough space for safe and rela-
tively free movement and proximity to quiet spaces or teen 
spaces. Enough space for an expanded floor mat helped 
spectators stay clear of the play space and helped VR users 
build confidence in relation to how far they could move. 
With regard to setup location in the library, in one exam-
ple, setting up VR in the main space of the library near a 
general reading area and computers enticed patrons to try 
VR when they otherwise might not have; seeing other pa-
trons use VR was a good incentive to test it. In other cases, 
setting up in a separate meeting room with surrounding 
activities and wrap-around programming like Ozobots, Per-
ler beads, slime, 3D pens, and coloring also worked well, 
and better supported participants who desired privacy 
during their VR experience. 
Construct a thoughtful  
promotion and outreach plan.
One of the main takeaways to coordinate successful VR 
programming involves a focus on program promotion. For 
example, posters and website advertisements were not 
the most effective forms of outreach. Rather, purposeful 
promotion of VR in relation to broader themes, fairs, or 
festivals was successful, and personal invitations coming 
directly from librarians or other patrons fostered participa-
tion. Although some patrons were interested in trying new 
technology, others required more information or explana-
tion about why VR might be worth trying in the first place. 
In summary, libraries need to identify where the value 
in using VR is located for their local region and patrons 
and promote based on those interests, rather than simply 
promoting VR as valuable to try in and of itself. 
Combining VR drop-in with larger library events, making 
VR part of a themed activity such as art making or world 
exploration, might reach a wider audience of patrons 
and build on the rich resources and activities already and 
Clockwise from top left: Cubelets robot blocks, Perler beads, 3D pens, and Ableton Push 2 music-making software and 
hardware. 

16
Virtual Reality in Public Libraries
otherwise available at the library. Interactive, wrap-around 
programming and other related activities seem to be 
important elements for garnering interest in VR and for 
running meaningful programs. This type of programming 
also makes it easier to include VR experiences that are 
purely fun and entertaining, an idea that was noted to be 
of interest to youth and adult patrons. 
Programming ideas and tensions  
in open vs. structured programming.
Understanding the impact of VR as a service and resource 
for library patrons is important to successful programming. 
Our study has shown that there is a tension between a 
desire for structured programming and open time with 
regard to VR programs. Librarians, in general, felt restrict-
ed by the given list of educational experiences that were 
recommended by Oculus as part of this study. 
In some cases, libraries let users explore the Oculus library 
and select other games and experiences of interest to their 
patrons. In other cases, librarians were happy to have a list 
from which to start but often wanted more time to explore 
these environments on their own before offering them to 
the public. As libraries serve a diverse range of patrons, 
librarians recognized the importance of providing a wide 
variety of apps in VR, such as apps that are educational but 
also entertaining, allowing them to be used for open game 
nights, for instance. 
Some librarians thought about using VR as a tool for com-
munity engagement by taking the technology to senior 
centers and nursing homes. Librarians also thought about 
possibly connecting the technology to storytime programs 
and speculated about how it could also be used for job 
training for librarians, such as for sorting books inside 
VR. Last, some of the librarians discussed how having VR 
in a makerspace area could encourage people to tinker 
around with the technology, make mistakes, and figure out 
what the technology is. Many of our research participants 
thought having VR in the library could help people try dif-
ferent technologies that they would otherwise be hesitant 
to use. 
Patrons and librarians wanted  
multiplayer options and interactivity.
Patrons and librarians were interested in exploring mul-
tiplayer options where more than one person could be in 
the same VR environment at the same time, which would 
require multiple headsets. VR experiences that were inter-
active were also popular—more so than 360-degree films 
and VR animation, or non-interactive experiences. One 
interesting outcome of hosting VR in the library was that 
it enabled conversation between librarians and patrons as 
well as across librarians and library staff. Many librarians in 
the study saw a clear place for VR as one tool among many 
in a library makerspace to bring people together to make 
art, create 3D models that might be actualized through 
3D printing, or simply explore the worlds and experiences 
available in VR.  
VR is more for teens and “techie”  
people, and probably not for me.
Before having VR in the library, many research participants 
associated VR with being a technology for teens and for 
“techie” people. However, when the VR technology was 
made accessible in libraries, not only teens, but also other 
populations—including senior patrons—participated and 
enjoyed it.


17
Virtual Reality in Public Libraries
FUTURE WORK
Games, fun, and entertainment. 
The researchers and project partners involved in this study 
sought to understand the role of VR in public libraries for 
informal learning and community engagement. Findings 
suggest that there is strong reason to continue with VR 
programming in libraries. Patrons immensely enjoyed 
experiencing VR. Librarians enjoyed introducing patrons to 
their first VR experience. Young people and seniors found 
the technology to be fun, exciting, engaging, and inspiring. 
Many patrons and librarians had positive social and techno-
logical experiences that could lead to stronger relationships 
between librarians and patrons and also to patrons’ active 
and continued participation in other library programs.
Building out opportunities for creation in VR. 
In our survey and interview questions, we observed a key 
omission in the responses of research participants: Very few 
people talked about the potential value of VR in relation to 
opportunities to create art and media in new, multimodal, 
immersive ways. Some patrons and librarians did use the 
creation tools available as part of the educational VR expe-
riences that were initially and freely made available to the 
libraries, such as Quill and Medium. In these cases, the in-
dividual using the experience required longer time periods 
to master the art creation tool, and also expressed a strong 
interest in continuing to explore those VR environments 
and keep drawing or sculpting. More frequent, varied, and 
prolonged exposure to VR may be necessary to have patrons 
start to actively imagine themselves as VR content creators 
rather than only as consumers. 
Defining the value of VR in the public library. 
This study presents an opportunity for public libraries as 
early adopters of the technology to shape the value of VR 
for the public and for the library. Data collected for this 
study show that most research participants do not feel that 
VR is something that they would personally own at the 
moment, partially due to the cost of the gear and its setup, 
and also because they do not yet have ongoing and mean-
ingful examples of how VR could be used in their lives. 
Empathy building and perspective taking may be areas 
that are worthy of further exploration, even though such 
experiences were not a part of this study. A belief that VR is 
a technology that will enable people to have such expe-
riences was enormously strong. From our study, it is clear 
that free access is valuable to the public. It is unclear what 
deeper and ongoing value of VR will persist for patrons. 
Experiencing VR sparked many ideas from both librarians 
and patrons that are worth exploring in the future. 


ischool.uw.edu/vrinlibraries
