“Magikarp Makover” by librarian Jennifer Goudeau!
Watch the VOD of this session here: https://www.twitch.tv/collections/tpuBAP2vGhcF7A The Game “Magikarp Makover” by librarian Jennifer Goudeau is a Honey Heist hack reminiscent of Pokemon Mystery Dungeon games. In this game of found family and hijinks, you play as a group of Pokemon helping your friend Magikarp. The game also comes with a handy character stat spinner! From the game’s itch.io page: “You're a pokemon, and your friend Magikarp is tired of being uncool and needs your help! Get him a cool surprise to make him feel like a hero instead of a zero. You'll face other pokemon, a long journey, and maybe even a meowth-shaped hot air balloon with a wobbuffet inside.” Resources
● Workshop: Hacking Your First RPG by the UCLA Game Lab ● The Gauntlet Podcast: TTRPG Hacks and Getting Games to the Table ● Easy-to-Hack Tabletop RPGs for Aspiring Creators by Coleman Gailloreto, University
XP ● Hack the RPG! by Bloat Games ● Lasers and Feelings Hacks List by Fay Onyx, Writing Alchemy Play Alikes ● Board/Card Games
○ Boss Monster

○ King of Tokyo ○ Clank! ○ Kill Doctor Lucky ● TTRPGs ○ Honey Heist, Goat Crashers, & The Witch is Dead by Grant Howitt ○ Honey Heist Hacks collection by Mint-Rabbit ○ Blades in the Dark by John Harper ○ Fiasco by Bully Pulpit Games ● Video Games ○ Pokemon Mystery Dungeon ○ Pokemon Go ○ Undertale Read Alikes ● River of Teeth by Sarah Gailey ● Six of Crows by Leigh Bardugo ● Patricia Wants to Cuddle by Samantha Allen ● Salt Magic by Hope Larson & Rebecca Monk ● Cursed Princess Club by LambCat ● Barb the Last Berserker by Dan Abdo & Jason Patterson ● Frogkisser! by Garth Nix ● The Raven Boys by Maggie Stiefvater ● Paola Santiago and the River of Tears by Tehlor kay Mejia ● Percy Jackson and the Olympians Series by Rick Riordan ● What’s Coming to Me by Francesca Padilla ● The Wee Free Men by Terry Pratchett
Watch Alikes ● The Oceans Movie Series ● Now You See Me ● Ghostbusters Movie Series ● Birds of Prey ● Howl’s Moving Castle ● Pokemon: The First Movie ● The Lost City ● Knives Out
Safety Tools ● Script Change by Beau Jágr Sheldon ● Guest Blog: An Introduction to Lines and Veils ● The Door is Open by Eirik Fatland ○ Blog by Lizzie Stark

○ Blog 2 by Eirik Fatland ● TTRPG Safety Toolkit collected by Kienna Shaw and Lauren Bryant-Monk
○ TTRPG Safety Toolkit Guide ○ Google Drive
Game RT Twitch Policy 1. Be kind and respectful to one another 2. Hate speech of any type will not be tolerated 3. We reserve the right to remove anyone from the chat for any reason 4. If you are feeling harassed by anyone, please notify a GameRT twitch mod and one of us will assist you 5. If you'd rather talk privately about anything, please send us a direct message
Learn More About GameRT Blog: bit.ly/GameRTBlog Facebook: bit.ly/GameRTLeague & bit.ly/GameRTFacebook Resources: bit.ly/GameRTPublicResources Website: bit.ly/GameRTWebsite Questions? Email gamert@ala.org

