1
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
Gen Z and millennials have some surprising attitudes and behaviors 
regarding media consumption and library use. 
Generational categories like Gen Z and millennials 
(aged 13-40 in 2022)1 are an important way to under-
stand book engagement and library use because “an 
individual’s age is one of the most common predictors 
of differences in attitudes and behaviors.”2
Mobile computing is a key aspect of daily life 
for Gen Z and millennials. 92% check social media 
every day; 25% check social media multiple times per 
hour. The high instance of reading on mobile devices 
among these groups, particularly of social media 
and other “walled garden” apps, is a profound shift 
from previous generations. This report will explain 
some implications of that development. It will aid 
librarians and other stakeholders in examining how 
libraries currently serve Gen Z and millennials, and 
how to continue serving them as they age. At times 
this report considers Gen Z and millennials together; 
at others, it drills down into generationally-specific 
behaviors when those behaviors differ sufficiently to 
warrant attention or explanation.
Based on a nationally representative survey 
sample conducted by the authors,3 this report 
Kathi Inman Berens, Ph.D. and Rachel Noorda, Ph.D. 
Portland State University
Executive Summary  
Gen Z and Millennials
How They Use Public Libraries  
and Identify Through Media Use


2
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
discusses the following attitudes and behaviors 
Gen Z and millennials have regarding libraries:
 Q 54% of Gen Z and millennials visited a phys-
ical library within a twelve-month period.
 Q Libraries attract even Gen Z and millennials 
who don’t identify as readers. 23% of Gen Z 
and millennials had visited a physical library 
in a twelve-month period AND did not 
identify as readers.
 Q Subscription-only and/or mobile-exclusive 
content provided in apps such as Webtoon 
(webcomics), Radish (romance e-novels)
and Audible (audiobooks) is particularly 
popular with Gen Z and millennials: 12% 
of Gen Z & 8% of millennials subscribe 
to webcomics and 30% of Gen Z & 38% 
of millennials subscribe to Audible. But 
subscription content, such Audible-exclu-
sive titles, is mostly unavailable for libraries to 
license.4
 Q 52% of Gen Z and millennial physical library 
patrons said they borrowed from library digital 
collections.
 Q Black (58%) and Latinx (57%) physical library 
patrons use digital collections more than the 
general survey population (52%).
 Q Long wait times for digital books disadvantage 
Black, Indigenous, and People of Color more 
than the general population. 47% of Black Gen 
Z and millennials overall (not just physical 
library patrons) have used digital collections, 
compared to 37% of the general population.
 Q 75% of Gen Z and millennial physical library 
patrons believe a library wait of one week or 
less is “long.”
 Q Teen lounges in libraries are safe, comfortable 
spaces that support:
 Q relaxation
 Q mental and social well-being
 Q learning untethered from school and educa-
tional mandates
 Q Given a choice, 59% of Gen Z and millennials 
would choose the graphic/manga version of a 
story rather than a text-only book.
 Q Preference for a graphic/manga version 
instead of text-only book is higher in Black 
(69%) and Latinx (73%) communities.
Overall, social media use, crossmedia identities 
(readers, gamers, makers, fans and more), and 
subscription engagement characterize Gen Z and 
millennials in contrast to other generations.
54% of Gen Z and millennials 
visited a physical library within 
a twelve-month period.
This report is organized into five parts:
1. Gen Z library use and non-use.
2. How Gen Z and millennials use media and discover books.
3. Gen Z and millennials’ identity categories such as readers, gamers, makers, and fans.
4. Challenges libraries face in growing Gen Z and millennials’ engagement.
5. Recommendations for how libraries can connect with Gen Z and millennials.


3
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
Introduction
Millennials (age 26–40) and especially Gen Z (age 
13–25) have grown up in an increasingly digital 
environment, which shapes their reading behavior, 
reading preferences, and modes of book discovery. 
The survey results show that 92% of Gen Z and 
millennials check social media daily. 25% report 
checking multiple times an hour. According to 2022 
Pew data, “fully 35% 
of teens say they are 
using at least one 
[social media platform] 
‘almost constantly.’”5 
 Gen Z is the first 
generation to have 
had access to mobile 
computing since early 
childhood. If previous 
generations had to physically move to access media 
in a particular location (e.g., the “tv room” in a 
house; a computer lab at school), most of today’s 
teenagers and young adults have microcomputers 
(“phones”) on their person.
The success of artificial intelligence-powered 
digital marketing helps to explain why 1 in 3 Gen 
Zers and millennials in the survey buy books based 
on recommendations from Instagram reviews/ads 
and 31% buy books because of TikTok reviews/ads. 
During their lives thus far, these two generations 
have been surrounded by pervasive media environ-
ments that mediate their interactions with friends, 
other social groups, and information. As a result, 
some of their behaviors and expectations when it 
comes to libraries require explanation.
More than people in previous generations, Gen 
Z lives in an augmented reality moving seamlessly 
between embodied and virtual space through 
phones. As one Gen 
Zer commented: 
“For me, online 
and offline are 
one and the same, 
basically the same 
thing, integrated.”6 
Yet, importantly, 
this comfort with 
the blurring of the 
digital and physical worlds does not translate into a 
preference for the digital. With more time spent on 
mobile computing comes increased need for “social 
media detox” and other efforts to limit or demar-
cate one’s time in mobile apps.7 Print books are Gen 
Zers’ #1 preferred book format. Young people visit 
bookstores. Despite all the digital options, browsing 
library shelves continues to be relevant to their 
discovery of new books.
Additionally, despite assumptions that young 
people may read less, both Gen Z and millennials 
are consuming books: on average they buy 1 ebook, 
1 audiobook, and 2 print books per month; and read 
(including through subscriptions) 1 ebook, 1 audio-
book, and 2 print books per month. Gen Zers buy 
and read more than millennials in all formats. Age 
negatively correlates with the number of print books 
bought per month: the younger Gen Zers are, the 
more print books they buy. The charts illustrate book 
reading and book buying across formats.
92% of Gen Z 
and millennials 
check social media 
daily. 25% report 
checking multiple 
times an hour.
Gen Zers buy and 
read slightly more 
than millennials in all 
formats. Print is the 
preferred format.
Average Number of Books  
Read per Month
Print
Audiobook
Ebook
 Gen Z  Millennials
0 1 2 3
Average Number of Books  
Bought per Month
 Gen Z  Millennials
Print
Audiobook
Ebook
0 1 2 3

4
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
1 GEN Z AND MILLENNIAL LIBRARY USE
Physical Library Visits
Do Gen Zers and millennials use libraries? How 
and to what extent? About half of Americans aged 
13–40 visit libraries in person, and this usage rate 
has been consistent over recent years. In the survey 
54% of Gen Z and millennials reported having used 
physical libraries within a twelve-month period. This 
percentage is very close to what Pew reported for 
millennial library use in 2017 (53%),8 and is higher 
than Pew’s findings a decade ago.9 27% of Gen Z 
and millennials 
report discovering 
books by browsing 
books on shelves 
at public libraries. 
Browsing public 
libraries is Gen Z’s 
#3 preferred place 
to discover books. 
Libraries are the 
#5 preferred place for millennials to discover books. 
Millennials are more likely to use the digital library 
collections than Gen Z. More (64%) African Amer-
ican or Black Gen Z and millennials visit the physical 
library, 10 percentage points higher than the general 
survey population. For both Latinx and Asian/Asian 
American Gen Z and millennials, browsing shelves 
in public libraries was the #3 preferred place of 
book discovery, after “on my phone in social media 
feeds” and “streaming TV/movies that are adapted 
to books.”
Gen Z slightly outperforms millennials in visits 
to physical libraries in the last twelve months. 
It also corresponds with Gen Z’s preference for 
printed books. Nourishing Gen Zers’ use of the 
library continues to require physical space and print 
materials because they like print books. Gen Z and 
millennials who had not been to the physical library 
in a twelve-month period read less than the general 
population across all formats except text messages 
and emails. Notably, 17% of the group that didn’t 
physically visit the library did report using library 
digital services.
Physical library visitors identified these barriers or 
attitudes to digital borrowing:
 Q 41% “I didn’t know how to access library 
services during the pandemic.”
 Q 20% “I don’t use library services.”
 Q 14% “There’s no library close to where I live.”
 Q 12% “I lost my library card.”
Gen Z and millennials are not going to the library 
only to borrow print books. Across age demo-
graphics, there was a 23 percentage point increase in 
Americans who attended library programs from 2014 
to 2019.10
Libraries Are Book 
Showrooms for Gen Z  
and Millennials
What role do libraries play in Gen Z and millennial 
reading habits and book discovery? In the Immersive 
Media and Books 2020 research, researchers found 
that 1 in 3 book engagers bought a book that they 
first found at the library.11 Generally, book engagers 
were context agnostic, meaning that they often 
found a book in one place and bought it or borrowed 
it in another. Turning attention to Gen Z and millen-
nials specifically in 2022, libraries fit well with the 
“robust sampling” culture that Gen Zers and millen-
nials are accustomed to. Digital subscription models 
Library Use  
Gen Z versus Millennials
0% 20% 40% 60%
Deterred by 
long holds
Used digital 
library services
Visited 
physical library
 Gen Z  Millennials
Nourishing Gen Zers’ 
use of the library 
continues to require 
physical space and 
print materials because 
they like print books. 

5
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
through which Gen Z and millennials consume other 
media (such as Netflix, Kindle Unlimited, Xbox 
Game Pass, Spotify, Audible, etc.) allow them to 
try new media products risk-free. In the traditional, 
print-centered book publishing ecosystem, libraries 
are the place for robust sampling.
Libraries allow people to try out books risk-free. 
This, and the role that libraries play in curating 
and promoting books, mean that libraries bolster 
publishers’ low marketing budgets—for free.
Penguin Random House disclosed during the 
Department of Justice antitrust trial on the proposed 
acquisition of Simon & Schuster that they allocate 
2% of their budget for marketing. Extrapolating from 
this, Guy LeCharles Gonzales calculates that they 
spend an average of $3,187 per title, for a total of 
$47.8 million.12 Visibility in the crowded marketplace 
is a formidable challenge facing publishers, and 
they will pay to get optimal book display placement 
algorithmically with online vendors and also at retail 
bookstores. They pay a commission of 3–7% on 
books sold, or a dollar amount around $100, for a 
display at a bookstore. By contrast, libraries display 
books for free–no marketing dollars demanded. 
Some even invite local bookstores to sell books 
at library-sponsored author events. In the digital 
environment, attentive digital librarians customize 
their curated collections to the borrowing and 
holds requests of local patrons. Digital collections 
managers can adjust licenses in real time to accom-
modate demand, if the library can afford to fund 
staff time to monitor digital collection use.
54% of Gen Z and Millennials 
Who Don’t Identify as 
Readers Visit Libraries—
Why?
43% of Gen Z and millennials don’t identify as 
readers. Of that “non-reader” group, 54% have 
been to their local library in the past twelve months. 
Why? What is it about libraries that attracts 
“non-readers”? What is the library’s value to 
non-readers?
The library provides a number of things beyond 
books: a safe, free place to hang out; important 
resources and advice during big life changes such as 
career transition, parenthood, new language acquisi-
tion, or learning to read; Wi-fi enabled work spaces; 
and creativity resources like maker spaces and 
media production equipment. Libraries also provide 
programming relevant to teens (Gen Z) and parents 
(older Gen Z and millennials), such as coding clubs, 
storytimes, job application help, and more. This 
helps to explain why, across age demographics, there 
was a 23-percentage point increase in Americans 
who attended library programs from 2014 to 2019.
The youth that researchers met during visits to 
two public library branches talked about coming 
to the library just to “vibe” and hang out. One 
contrasted the public library experience to that of 
her school library, where she said students had to 
have “a reason to be there” such as a test or study 
hall, as activities are tied to the school’s curriculum. 
While her school library required her to be quiet and 
have a pass to enter, the public library was a place 
where she and other teens could chat while crafting. 
Making collaged bookmarks in the teen room, one 
young person commented, “this is so relaxing,” 
which points towards the role that libraries play in 
mental/emotional health and socializing. At both 
library branches we visited, books lined the walls 
of the teen lounges. Some young people picked 
up books as they did other things such as crafting, 
gaming, checking their phones, chatting, and 
showing their craftwork to the teen librarians and an 
adult mentor. In these spaces, books were always an 
option but were not the focus of the experience.


6
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
Millennials and Gen Z  
Also Visit Bookstores
In 2023, independent bookstores are a surprising 
success story, despite consumers buying more 
books from online retailers. 2023 has seen a growth 
of independent bookstores, leading to the highest 
number of American Bookseller 
Association members in over 
two decades.13 In keeping with 
this, bookstores are an important 
part of reading for many Ameri-
cans in the 13–40 age group. This 
research found that 58% of Gen 
Z and millennials bought a book 
in a bookstore in the prior twelve 
months. More than one third (35%) of those bought 
a book because they were browsing at the store 
and found something they liked. While bookstores 
don’t allow for the same level of robust sampling 
that libraries do, they do allow readers to examine 
different books in person and often offer book 
recommendations and events.
A secondary appeal: indie bookstores tap into 
people’s ethical values to “shop local” as a means 
of supporting one’s community. 13% of Gen Z and 
millennials said they bought books to support their 
local bookstore. Browsing shelves in brick-and-
mortar libraries is the #3 preferred place for Gen Z 
and millennials to discover books (13%), followed by 
browsing shelves in brick-and-mortar bookstores as 
#4 (11%). The #5 preferred way is browsing shelves 
in public libraries (11% of Gen Z and millennials). 
These data demonstrate that Gen Z and millennials 
slightly prefer bookstores to libraries for printed 
book discovery. However, Gen Z and millennials 
equally prefer recommendations from booksellers 
and librarians (15%).
The instant availability of 
popular titles and the shopping 
experience would seem to be the 
most important differentiators 
between bookstores and libraries; 
however, the most popular print 
books at the library are less likely 
to be on the shelves for patrons 
to browse because they are borrowed out and on 
hold lists. By contrast, bookstores highlight the 
most popular titles on tables and face them out 
on shelves, increasing visibility and availability of 
in-demand products. Indie bookstores often feature 
cafés and places to sit where customers can make 
themselves as they browse. The Public Library Asso-
ciation recommended that libraries add coffee and 
couches back in 2017, but many libraries continue 
to lack the ability to have food inside the building, 
making library cafés a challenge to implement.14
Gen Z and Millennials’  
Digital Collections Use
It’s clear that Gen Z and millennials use libraries for 
their physical book collections and other resources, 
but what about their digital books? The survey found 
that only 37% of Gen Z and millennials borrowed 
from library digital collections. 80% of those borrow 
ebooks and audiobooks 2–7+ times per year. A 
majority of digital collection non-users say they 
don’t understand how to access digital collections, 
indicating that there is an opportunity to proactively 
educate younger library users about digital library 
resources.
Millennials outpace Gen Zers in using the digital 
library collections, and they also have a higher 
tolerance for long wait times—something that library 
A majority of library 
digital collections’  
non-users say they don’t 
know how to access 
digital collections. 

7
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
 BIPOC Patrons Use Digital Collections More  
Than the General Population
patrons often encounter with popular digital mate-
rials. While 83% of library users ages 13–40 report 
not being deterred by wait times for digital library 
resources, Gen Zers are more deterred by long 
wait lines than millennials (21% compared to 17%). 
Notably, a combined total of 75% of Gen Zers and 
millennials say that a wait time of one week or less is 
“long.”
What are the barriers to 
digital borrowing for those 
who haven’t visited a phys-
ical library in a 12-month 
period? 40% said “I don’t 
use library services.” 28% 
said “I didn’t know how 
to access library services 
during the pandemic.” 20% said “I don’t read audio-
books or ebooks.” 12% said “I lost my library card.”
Use of library digital collections breaks down 
differently by race and ethnicity. Black (58%) and 
Latinx (57%) physical library patrons use digital 
collections more than the general survey popu-
lation (52%). 47% of Black Gen Z and millennials 
overall (not just physical library patrons) have used 
digital collections 
(compared to 
37%). Black and 
Latinx GenZ/
millennials are 
also more likely 
to be deterred by 
long hold lines at 
the library. There-
fore, fair digital 
access is a racial equity issue, facilitating Black, 
Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC) access to 
books.
Digital library services
BIPOC patrons
Borrow digital library materials like ebooks and audiobooks
African American or Black
Highest physical and digital library use: 63.9% had visited the 
local library in the last 12 months.
Asian and Asian American
Browsing shelves in public libraries is the #3 preferred method 
of book discovery
Latino, Latina, Latinx
Browsing shelves in public libraries is the #3 preferred method 
of book discovery
60%
40%
20%
0%
All Latinx Asian Black
 Sample overall           Digital library visitors
Long Library Wait Time  
According to Gen Z and Millennials
8%
More than 
several months
16%
More than 
a day 
37%
More than a week 
21%
Any wait 18%
More than 
a month 
75% of Gen Zers 
and millennials 
say that a wait 
time of one 
week or less 
is “long.” 
Fair digital access is 
a racial equity issue, 
facilitating Black, 
Indigenous, and People 
of Color (BIPOC) 
access to books. 

8
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
2 GEN Z AND MILLENNIALS MEDIA USE  
       AND BOOK DISCOVERY
Media Use:  
Who Is Reading What?
This research expands the definition of reading 
to include a wide range of formats. We found that 
among Gen Z and millennials the top four most 
read modes in the last 12 months were digital (text 
messages, email, social media, websites). Print books 
came in fifth, with ebooks and audiobooks even 
further down the list. Some shifts in reading may be 
due to the amount of time people spend with their 
mobile devices and the conveniences of being able 
to read in short bursts—such as during a break from 
work or school, or while in transit, or while waiting in 
line. Webtoon and other serial content subscription 
apps, for example, compete with books for reading 
time, and their quick-to-read formats (such as 
single-pane webcomics), gives them an advantage 
in meeting readers’ needs for short bursts of reading. 
Webtoon, at 85.6 million monthly readers globally, 
is the fastest-growing reading app.15 Webtoon’s U.S. 
audience hovers around 20% of its global audience, 
or 17.1 million monthly readers. Webtoon offers 
most of its serial content for free; subscribers pay to 
access content faster than the free release.16
Some differences exist between Gen Z and 
millennials in reading practices. Gen Zers are reading 
chats in games and webnovels in greater proportions. 
Millennials, meanwhile, read more emails, ebooks & 
audiobooks, blogs, and newspapers compared to the 
younger group.
The How and Where  
of Book Discovery
The hybrid online/offline environment that Gen 
Z and millennials are embedded in significantly 
impacts their book discovery and reading habits. 
The graphic below illustrates this—showing how 
and where people discover books alongside the 
subscription services most popular among Gen Z 
and millennials.
As can be seen in the graphic below, Gen Z and 
millennials discover books based on recommen -
dations of people they know (friends, family) as 
well as strangers (talent and influencers). They 
discover books both in the digital world (social 
media, streaming/TV movies, online bookstores and 
library catalogs) and in the physical one (book -
store and library shelves). Many also subscribe 
to an ecosystem of services that are inaccessible, 
at least in part, to libraries. Audible, for example, 
is a mixed bag: some of its audiobooks are avail -
able at libraries, and some are not. A portion of 
“Amazon Originals” and “Amazon Exclusives” are 
currently only accessible through DPLA’s Palace 
Marketplace. 17 The following content is currently 
inaccessible to libraries: CrunchyRoll; fanfiction 
Read in the Last 12 Months
75%
100%
50%
25%
0%
Percenrage of Gen Z and Millennials
Text Messages
Email
Social Media
WebsitesPrint BooksOnline NewsGame Chats
BlogsEbooks
Printed NewsAudiobooksWebnovels

9
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
and serialized fiction apps like Wattpad, Radish, 
and Kindle Vella; and subscription services in 
the “Other” category which includes Webtoon, 
Substack, Patreon, and others. Of the Gen Zers and 
millennials who read webnovels, 60% pay for faster 
access to content; for people who use Substack, 
79% pay for faster access to content. 18 “Original” 
content usually means it can be accessed exclu -
sively on that platform. Readers tender an unseen 
payment in the “attention economy” as they read 
on these apps: the pattern of their time on site, how 
often they check the site, how quickly one opens a 
new installment, and far more granular information 
than that.19
Modes of book discovery differ somewhat 
between Gen Z and millennials. Gen Z invests 
more trust in celebrities, influencers, and social 
lists, though both groups accept them as trusted 
resources. More than one third (34%) of Gen Z 
people discover books based on recommenda-
tions from influencers (TikTokers, Instagrammers, 
bloggers, Discord streamers, and so forth.) Millen-
nials are somewhat less influenced than Gen Z by 
influencers (23% for millennials compared to 34% 
of Gen Z). By contrast, millennials read significantly 
more online news services (57% compared to Gen 
Z’s 36%) and printed newspapers (27% compared to 
Gen Z’s 14%). Reviews are more effective in driving 
millennials’ book discovery. Millennials’ media 
habits are a middle ground between Gen Z and older 
generations. Perhaps unsurprisingly, Gen Z is less 
influenced by legacy media reviews: more (20%) 
said they were influenced by recommendations from 
online reviewers (Goodreads, Amazon, Audible, 
and Barnes and Noble) than by bestseller lists (15%) 
such as New York Times, USA Today, Publishers 
Weekly, Amazon.
Preferred Ways to  
Find Books
Streaming TV and movies is the #2 preferred way 
Gen Z and millennials discover books. For Black Gen 
Z and millennials, streaming is the #1 preferred way 
to discover books, a 10 percentage point increase 
over the general population. Gen Z and millennials 
Audible
Kindle Unlimited
Crunchyroll
Other
Wattpad, Radish, 
Kindle Vella
 35%
 24%
 19%
 19%
 17%
Recommendations 
from friends
Streaming TV/movies that 
are adapted from books
Recommendations 
from family
Recommendations 
from talent
Recommendations 
from influencers
 59%
 41%
 37%
 32%
 28%
How
On my phone, on social 
media feeds
Browsing online library 
catalog
Streaming TV/movies that 
are adapted from books
Browsing brick-and-mortar 
bookstores
Browsing online bookstores
Browsing shelves in public 
libraries
 55%
 32%
 31%
 30%
 27%
 27%
Where ServicesBook Discovery

10
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
are media omnivores who discover new content 
across media, finding a story they like in one format 
and following that story through its representations 
in other formats (“crossmedia”). These gener-
ations also 
move nimbly 
from virtual 
to embodied 
space. Latinx 
Gen Z and 
millennials 
reported strong 
engagement 
with fanfiction, 
48% (10 percentage points more than the general 
population) and 27% subscribe to mobile serial 
fiction apps such as Wattpad, Radish and Kindle 
Vella (10 percentage points more than the general 
population).
Digging deeper, we asked survey respondents 
to check all of the ways they discover books (the 
blue bars in the chart above) and their preferred 
way of discovering books (the red bars in the chart 
above). Recommendation from friends (25%) 
is the most-preferred way to find books, closely 
followed by recommendations from talent 20 (8%), 
influencers (7%), and social lists (6%). 21 These two 
categories together (friends and social media/influ -
encers) far outpace recommendations from family 
(9%) as the most-preferred way to find books. 
Preferred Social Media 
Platforms
There are both similarities and differences 
between the social media platforms that Gen Z 
and millennials preference. Both groups prefer 
Instagram (21%) and YouTube (Gen Z—16%; 
millennials—17%) at similar rates, but beyond that 
there is a divergence. Gen Z indicates a relative 
preference for TikTok (23%) and Snapchat (13%), 
while millennials prefer Facebook (33%) much more 
than Gen Z (7%). These findings are consistent 
with Pew’s 2022 research into teen use of social 
media platforms, which found that “TikTok has 
established itself as one of the top online platforms 
for U.S. teens, while the share of teens who use 
Facebook has fallen sharply.” 22
The differences between Gen Z and millen -
nial social media platform preferences become 
significant when it comes to book discovery and 
purchase. While 21% of both Gen Z and millennials 
bought a book recommended or advertised on 
YouTube, millennials were more likely to buy a book 
recommended or advertised on Instagram (35% of 
millennials, 29% of Gen Z) and Gen Zers were more 
likely than millennials to buy a book recommended 
or advertised on TikTok (34% of Gen Z, 28% of 
millennials). Of the 46% of respondents who 
bought a book from a bookstore, Instagram was 
their #1 preferred platform. These data raise the 
question: how can librarians participate in social 
media marketing if they lack the time to immerse 
themselves in platform-specific conversations and 
vernacular? Does content pushed across traditional 
marketing channels even reach Gen Z and millen -
nials?23
Social media on mobile phones is effective 
because it allows marketers to achieve “six touch-
points”24 that build product awareness faster than 
is possible in newspapers, magazines and television. 
Talent and influencers typically post new content 
daily, and engage in conversation with fans. Such 
For Black Gen Z and 
millennials, streaming 
TV/movies is the 
#1 preferred way to 
discover books.
Recommendations 
from social lists
Top 6 Methods of Book Discovery 
for Gen Z and Millennials
0% 20% 40% 60%
Recommendations 
from influencers
Recommendations 
from talent
Recommendations 
from family
Streaming TV/
movies
Recommendations 
from friends
 Overall  Preferred

11
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
interaction builds trust and establishes credibility. 
That’s why talent and influencers are also sites of 
conversation among fans. Identification as a “fan” is 
high with Gen Z and millennials (52%) and fans have 
many channels, online and offline, to engage with 
creators and hang out longer in the storyworlds they 
love.
When fans are also creators, printed books make 
good props in visual media like TikTok short videos 
and Instagram Reels. There are no TikTok videos of 
ebooks! Printed books can be imaginatively used as 
conversation pieces or expressive objects. An early 
BookToker, Ayman Chaudrhary, famously videoed 
herself throwing Song of Achilles across the room 
because it broke her heart. Many #booktoks focus 
on the materiality of the printed book, including 
closeups of bookmarks and other types of deco-
ration, or stacks of books filmed in stop-motion 
animation. For celebrities and influencers, books are 
a quick way to generate ideas for fan engagement. 
Emma Roberts, an actress who started a book club 
on Instagram during pandemic lockdowns, said: 
talking about books “is one of my favorite ways to 
engage with my followers. … [It] just adds so much 
more substance to your online interactions.”25 
Finally, the automation and customization of digital 
technology helps to make social media marketing 
effective. Artificial intelligence “can create 100 
different variations” of a particular author news-
letter or collate disparate datasets into a remarkably 
personal and customized pitch.26
Trends like these are top-of-mind for the most 
avid readers and media consumers; librarians should 
keep them in mind when strategizing how to “meet” 
Gen Z and millennials where they “live.”
Millennial Preferred 
Social Media Platform
Reddit 6%
Twitter 4%
Discord 2%
Facebook 33%
Snapchat 4%
YouTube 17%
Instagram 21%
TikTok 8%
Gen Z Preferred 
Social Media Platform
Reddit 3%
Twitter 4%
Discord 7%
Facebook 7%
Snapchat 13%
YouTube 16%
Instagram 21%
TikTok 23%

12
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
3 GEN Z AND MILLENNIAL IDENTITIES
Consumers and Creators
In addition to consuming media, Gen Z and millen-
nials also create it. They hold multiple identities, 
as readers, gamers, writers, fans, livestreamers, 
podcasters, and more. More Gen Zers identify as 
gamers, and fewer identify as readers. Millennials 
have higher percentages of identification as readers, 
fans, livestreamers, and podcasters. Identity is a 
perception of self, and identities are social, multiple, 
and fluid. In choosing to report self-identification, 
such as being a fan, the Gen Z and millennials in this 
study were able to interpret the terms of identity 
in their own ways. A fan could be an enthusiast of 
anything, not just book- or media-related things. 
The survey allowed respondents to define them-
selves as they saw fit, without required benchmarks 
to establish who “qualified” as a fan.
So why do these media identities matter, partic-
ularly to libraries? Leung et al. found that the more 
relevant a product is to a person’s identity, the more 
the physical version of that product will appeal to 
the consumer.27 Gen Z and millennials tend to buy 
more books per month if they identify as readers. 
Identities are social, and 
the community aspect of 
media consumption is a 
motivating factor for Gen 
Z and millennials. Being 
part of a fan commu-
nity and connecting 
with others like them 
is the most important 
element of Gen Z media 
consumption. Nearly 
one-third (32%) of Gen 
Zers who identify as 
gamers report that they 
play videogames as a 
way to talk with friends, 
compared to 26% of 
gamers in the general 
survey population. Two 
of the top 3 reasons why 
Gen Z people report identifying as fans are 1) to be 
part of a fan community (27%) and 2) to meet others 
like them (26%). Gaming and fandoms provide the 
community and connection that Gen Zers value. By 
contrast, reading reflected more solitary pleasures. 
Reading for Gen Z was primarily motivated by “me 
time” and the desire for escapism. Given this orien-
tation, libraries are in a unique position to demon-
strate to Gen Z the social 
dimension of books by 
providing them spaces 
for community to meet 
and talk, especially inside 
branch libraries.
One of the most 
important findings of the 
Immersive Media and 
Books 2020 research 
was that avid media 
consumers are avid 
across categories: it’s 
not a zero-sum game. 
People who avidly game 
and avidly watch TV/
movies are also often 
avid readers and book 
buyers. In the 2020 
study, we defined “avid” 
engagement as 4+ books per month, which was 53% 
of the survey population.28 For these “avid” engagers, 
Media Identities
Gen Z and Millennials
Writers Livestreamers Podcasters
25% 13% 10%
Readers Gamers Fans
57% 53% 52%


13
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
there is an amplifying effect as an individual moves 
between media modes and platforms.
For Gen Z and millennials, 57% identify as readers, 
53% as gamers, and 52% as fans. Those who discover 
books through 5+ different modes have higher rates 
of identification across 
the identity categories. 
They eagerly explore 
content across different 
media and identify 
as both consumers: 
readers (74%), fans 
(62%) and gamers 
(56%); and makers: 
writers (33%), lives-
treamers (17%), and 
podcasters (14%). Avid 
engagers fluidly move 
between consuming and 
making media. Perhaps 
this is why social media is such a popular way for 
Gen Z and millennials to discover books: it taps into 
both the consumption and production aspects of 
their identity, as they watch talent and influencers, 
then join the conversation by posting their own 
content in response.
These complex consumer/producer identities 
were reflected in our ethnographic research. Gen 
Zers researchers met at library branch visits were 
well aware of the creator economy, for example, and 
talked about ways to participate in it. One entrepre-
neurial young woman had three different ideas for 
making and selling products in the creator economy. 
For instance, she was interested in building a lip 
gloss business using vegan products because those 
products are in-demand with other Gen Zers and 
because vegan products are more sustainable for the 
environment. One young man regularly wrote and 
recorded his own rap music in the recording studio 
inside his local library.
In another library site visit, researchers observed 
teens alternating between playing video games 
together and pausing to go back and join the larger 
group craft activity. Some of the specific media 
they identified consuming included rap and country 
music, Batman and 2K video games, and TV such as 
anime, iZombie, Umbrella Academy, Love/Dance/
Robots, and 
Grey’s Anatomy. 
They talked about 
reading manga, 
the Geronimo 
series, and other 
books. Occasion-
ally the young 
people would 
break away from 
the craft activity 
to quietly peruse 
the shelves of 
books lining the 
teen lounge walls. In other words, the teens moved 
fluidly between creating, consuming, socializing, 
talking about their media, and browsing shelves, 
which illustrates their hybrid identities and engage-
ment with both physical and digital media.
Gen Zers we met 
at our library 
branch visits 
were well aware 
of the creator 
economy, for 
example, and 
talked about ways 
to participate in it. 


14
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
4 CHALLENGES
Libraries (and publishers) face three main challenges 
when it comes to Gen Z and millennial media habits 
and preferences.
1. Amazon Frames  
Gen Z and Millennial  
Book Expectations
Gen Z and millennials’ high use of Amazon’s audio-
book and ebook paid subscription services poses 
a challenge for libraries particularly because of 
“Amazon-exclusive” licensing, which prohibits some 
authors from distributing their work outside the 
Amazon ecosystem. The same is true for “Amazon 
Originals,” which is exclusively available to Amazon 
subscribers. In June 2022, DPLA partnered with 
Lyrasis and Knight Foundation to launch The Palace 
Project, a not-for-profit e-reader app, platform, and 
marketplace that allows libraries to serve e-con-
tent from all their vendors to patrons via a single 
app, available for iOS or Android. DPLA also runs 
Palace Marketplace, with an emphasis on providing 
libraries with flexible licensing models. Palace 
Marketplace includes more than 1.2 million ebook 
and audiobook titles from all of the Big 5 publishers, 
Amazon Publishing, 
Audible, hundreds of 
mid-size and indepen-
dent publishers, and 
independent authors. So 
far, Palace Marketplace 
is the only platform that 
has negotiated access 
to titles from Amazon 
Publishing and Audible. If 
there are Amazon-exclu-
sive books that are not accessible through the public 
library, this limits the library’s ability to serve its 
patrons and offer them the books that they need and 
want, in the formats that they need and want. And, 
of course, libraries and publishers are not the only 
organizations whose operations have been disrupted 
by Amazon. Borders closed in 2011 and Barnes and 
Noble has retrenched from 726 stores in 2007 to 
600 stores in May 2023.29
Additionally, the convenience of direct-to-door 
delivery of books from retailers like Amazon builds 
expectation in Gen Z and millennials regarding their 
access to print books. Amazon’s advantage is conve-
nience. Many libraries offer some delivery services to 
homebound individuals; and several libraries around 
the country pivoted during the COVID-19 pandemic 
to offer book delivery services to their patrons when 
physical library doors were closed to the public. 
As the world transitions into another stage of 
COVID-19 where pandemic becomes endemic, print 
book delivery should remain in the conversation for 
libraries to increase print circulation and reach print-
hungry Gen Zers.
2. Pirating Books versus 
Library’s Legitimate 
Digital Book Access
One third (32%) of Gen Z and millennials download 
or read books for free from unlicensed sources. The 
ease of downloading and sharing ebooks and audio-
books has been staunched by digital-rights-manage-
ment software 
installed in 
digital books 
by publishers. 
But publishers 
remain wary 
that ebooks and 
audiobooks cut 
into print sales. 
John Sargent, the former Macmillan CEO who led an 
8-week embargo against granting libraries access to 
new digital book releases, defended his decision by 
saying he didn’t want “frictionless” ebook access to 
train customers to get new releases for free.30 More 
recently, the Association of American Publishers-
successfully sued to prevent state legislatures from 
mandating “reasonable terms”  for libraries’ digital 
book licensing.31 Publishers prevailed in the first 
One third (32%) of 
Gen Z and millennials 
download or read 
books for free from 
unlicensed sources. 


15
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
case decided in a federal district court, winning the 
right to charge licensing prices without additional 
regulatory oversight beyond existing laws. This win 
is welcome news for publishers, but it doesn’t affect 
ebook reading beyond the scope of library licensing. 
Publishers might benefit in the long run by encour-
aging Gen Z and millennials to borrow more ebooks 
from libraries, because doing so might train them to 
seek out licensed ebooks and audiobooks rather than 
pirated, often substandard, versions.
The 32% of Gen Z and millennials who pirate 
books is a large potential audience whose needs are 
not currently met by long wait times. Would more 
people borrow from libraries if wait times for ebooks 
and audiobooks were shorter? Can people who are in 
the habit of illegally downloading books be retrained 
to borrow licensed digital books from libraries?
These questions are important because the habits 
young people develop in accessing digital books may 
persist into adulthood, when they will have more 
control over their disposable income as book buyers 
and will also be able to vote for or against library tax 
levies.
Libraries give people a legitimate, morally 
unimpeachable way to access free books. Library 
borrowing also leads to book buying and discovery. 
The Immersive Media and Books 2020 study found 
that 33% of the people who discovered a book at 
the library went 
on to purchase it.32 
Publishers need 
discovery tools in 
a very crowded 
media marketplace. 
“Pirates” are also 
some of the most 
passionate book 
readers. Immer-
sive Media and 
Books 2020 shows 
that “pirates” are 
super-consumers, 
active across all 
media both as consumers and producers.33 They 
are people who sometimes purchase books they’ve 
already downloaded/read, and they actively partici-
pate in online, book-centered communities.
Publishers, librarians, and authors should consider 
aligning in one mission to keep people reading digital 
books through legitimate access. Libraries are a 
time-proven and convenient way to do this.
3. Lack of Equitable  
Access to Digital Collections  
Harms BIPOC
Publishers are for-profit companies and public 
libraries are freely accessible mission-driven public 
organizations. This structural difference can lead to 
tension between libraries and publishers regarding 
digital lending terms. This report substantiates 
through data that BIPOC patrons use digital collec-
tions more than the general population. In her 
analysis of public library mission statements, Melissa 
Fraser-Arnott identified six components of modern 
public library identity: 1) community building, 2) 
culture and recreation, 3) equitable access, 4) 
information, 5) positive impact, and 6) steward-
ship.34 Crawford Barniskis notes that lifelong learning 
and knowledge acquisition are core to public library 
mission statements.35 As libraries, publishers and 
authors collaborate to make reading legitimately-ac-
cessed digital books easier, the guiding principles 
Fraser-Arnott identifies should be kept in mind.
Publishers, librarians, 
and authors should 
consider aligning 
in one mission 
to keep people 
reading digital books 
through legitimate 
access. Libraries 
are a time-proven 
and convenient 
way to do this. 

16
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
5 RECOMMENDATIONS
Based on this report about Gen Z and millennials, we 
researchers have two top-level recommendations 
supported by several specific ways libraries might 
increase their relevance with Gen Z and millennials.
1. Get in Gen Z  
and Millennials’ 
Consideration Set
Many Gen Z and millennials report that shelves at 
public libraries are some of their favorite places to 
browse for books. But their attention is corralled 
multiple times per day (if not per hour!) by ad-sup-
ported social media environments. How to get 
their attention? A simple external link from digital 
borrowing apps, such as Libby, to the branch library’s 
website could make a big difference in keeping local 
branch libraries squarely in Gen Z and millennials’ 
consideration set.
2. Communicate Libraries’ 
Unique Qualities
More than previous generations, Gen Z responds to 
values-based marketing.36 The same people who buy 
books at their local bookstore are people who might 
champion libraries, if they knew their advocacy 
would matter. Here are some of the value proposi-
tions libraries offer Gen Z and millennials and why 
supporting libraries contributes to the greater social 
good:
Libraries are free to visit and borrow from.
There may be confusion about why one would visit 
a library, particularly for people whose only prior 
experience of libraries is shaped by school libraries 
which might have strict rules around noise and use. 
Don’t assume all people know that public libraries 
loan a wide range of materials, including ebooks and 
audiobooks.
Libraries are fun. The library is more than books 
and borrowing: library programming, innovative 
resources, and safe spaces to chill out are all great 
uses of branch libraries. Our observational work at 
Cuyahoga County Public Library branches showed 
us that Gen Zers are coming to the library to hang 
out with people and socialize after school.
Libraries protect privacy. Are patrons aware that 
libraries protect patron privacy and intentionally 
do not collect their data? Gen Z and millennials are 
habituated to exchanging their privacy for access 
to content and services, such as providing an email 
address or allowing their online behavior to be 
tracked. The core library value of not storing readers’ 
borrowing histories may not necessarily resonate as 
valuable to younger people. It’s time to make Gen 
Z and millennials aware of why privacy is core to 
libraries’ commitment to intellectual freedom.
Libraries are green. Libraries are the ultimate 
green organizations in the book industry, reusing and 
sharing books. Socially conscious and activist-driven 
Gen Z and millennials align with companies and 
organizations that are eco-friendly and reduce 
carbon footprints. Want to reduce waste? Use your 
local library.  Q


17
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
METHODOLOGY  
This report on Gen Z and millennial library behaviors 
is informed by two primary datasets, one quantita-
tive and the other qualitative.
The quantitative data comes from a survey of 
2075 Gen Z and millennials (aged 13–40) in March 
2022. The survey was conducted through Qualtrics, 
an industry-standard survey software that gathers 
respondents according to parameters set by the 
survey designers. The survey was designed to be 
completed in 15 minutes or less; research shows that 
completion rates drop after 15 minutes.
Quotas were implemented for race, gender, and 
region to ensure sample representativeness of this 
age group in the U.S. population. Gen Z represents 
44.3% of the overall sample (919 respondents) and 
millennials 55.7% of the overall survey sample (1156 
respondents).
The report also covers a diverse range of income 
levels. Of the 68.2% who had a job in the twelve 
months prior to March 2022, 38.1% reported earning 
less than $30,000; 28.4% earned $30,000-$49,999; 
19.8% earned $50,000–74,999; 13.6% earned 
$75,000+.
The qualitative data comes from ethnographic 
research at two branches of Cuyahoga County (OH) 
Public Library: Garfield and South Euclid. We did 
extra training and received certification from Port-
land State’s Institutional Review Board to include 
minors in this study.
We conducted listening sessions with staff at 
Cuyahoga County Public named in the Acknowl-
edgments. We also talked informally with librarians 
before and after our 2022 ALA panel37, and in corre-
spondence with librarians who reached out after our 
talk.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
The authors thank Dr. Alan Inouye, Senior Director 
of Public Policy & Government Relations at the 
American Library Association, for convening conver-
sation about the future of libraries in a 2022 round-
table in Washington D.C. The roundtable included 
former ALA President Sari Feldman, Brian O’Leary 
(Executive Director of the Book Industry Study 
Group), and Larra Clark (Deputy Director of ALA 
Public Policy and Advocacy Office & Public Library 
Association), to all of whom we tender our thanks. 
From this conversation, important questions were 
raised that this report answers.
We are grateful to the leadership team at 
Cuyahoga County (OH) Public Library. Thank you 
(in alphabetical order) Daniel Barden (Technical 
Services Director), Wendy Bartlett (Branches 
Manager), Kaitlin Booth (Digital Collections 
Manager), and Hallie Rich (Chief, Communica-
tions and External Relations). Particularly thanks to 
Pamela Jankowski (Chief Public Services Officer) for 
arranging the branch visits. Thank you, Jen Deluke 
(Teen Librarian at Garfield Branch), Megan Barrett 
(Garfield Branch Manager), Emma Torrell (Teen 
Librarian at South Euclid Branch), Steve Haynie 
(South Euclid Branch Manager), and Louie Moore 
(Mentor/Monitor at South Euclid Branch) as well as 
the groups of young library patrons who welcomed 
us into their spaces to learn and listen.

18
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
BIBLIOGRAPHY  
Albanese, Andrew. “ALA Midwinter 2020: Macmillan CEO John 
Sargent, Librarians Spar Over E-book Embargo.” Publishers 
Weekly. 26 January 2020. publishersweekly.com/pw/by 
-topic/industry-news/libraries/article/82261-ala-midwinter 
-2020-macmillan-ceo-john-sargent-librarians-spar-over 
-e-book-embargo.html.
Albanese, Andrew. “In Final Order, Court Declares Maryland’s 
Library Ebook Law Unconstitutional.” Publishers Weekly. June 
14, 2022. publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/industry-news/
libraries/article/89598-in-final-order-court-declares 
-maryland-s-library-e-book-law-unconstitutional.html.
Alter, Alexander and Elizabeth Harris, “Some Surprising Good 
News: Bookstores Are Booming,” New York Times, July 10, 
2022.
Bailey, E.R., Matz, S.C., Youyou, W. et al. “Authentic self-expres-
sion on social media is associated with greater subjective well-
being.” Nature Communication 11, 4889 (2020).  
doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-18539-w.
Berens, Kathi Inman. “Can Amazon’s Kindle Vella Break Through 
with Younger Readers?” Publishers Weekly. 4 March 2022. 
publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/industry-news/libraries/
article/88686-pla-pacific-northwest-spotlight-can-amazon 
-s-kindle-vella-break-through-with-younger-readers.html.
Broomfield, Benjamin. “How to Bring AI Into Your Digital 
Marketing Strategy.” 16 September 2022. clickz.com/how-to 
-bring-ai-into-your-digital-marketing-strategy/267393.
Crawford Barniskis, Shannon. “Deconstructing the mission: A 
critical content analysis of public library mission statements.” 
The Library Quarterly 86, no. 2 (2016): 135–152.
Dimock, Michael. “Defining Generations: Where Millennials End 
and Gen Z Begins”, Pew Research Center, Jan 17, 2019.
Dwyer, Kate. “Kaia, Kendall and EmRata Are Taking a Page 
From Oprah.” New York Times. 9 March 2021. nytimes.
com/2021/03/09/style/kaia-gerber-book-club-kendall 
-jenner-emily-ratajkowski-belletrist.html.
Fraser-Arnott, Melissa. “Exploring public library identity through 
mission statements.” Public Library Quarterly 41, no. 3 (2022): 
236–256.
Geiger, A.W. “Millennials are the most likely generation of Amer-
icans to use public libraries.” 21 June 2017. pewresearch.org/
fact-tank/2017/06/21/millennials-are-the-most-likely 
-generation-of-americans-to-use-public-libraries.
Hessekiel, David. “Values & Value: The Gen Z Paradox.”  
forbes.com/sites/davidhessekiel/2022/10/24/values--value 
-the-gen-z-paradox/?sh=35c18a1c273b.
JungleScout. Amazon Advertising Report 2022. junglescout.com/
wp-content/uploads/2022/05/Amazon-Advertising-Report 
-2022-Jungle-Scout.pdf.
Katz, Roberta, Sarah Ogilvie, Jane Shaw and Linda Woodhead. 
Gen Z, Explained. Chicago: University of Chicago Press 2021.
Lambert, Troy. “Retail Co-Location: Coffee at the Library.” 12 June 
2017. publiclibrariesonline.org/2017/06/retail-co-location 
-coffee-at-the-library.
LeCharles Gonzalez, Guy. “Marketing Math: Penguin Random 
House’s 2 Percent Gambit”, Quoted in Friedman, The Hot 
Sheet 14 September 2022.
Leung, Eugina, Maria Cristina Cito, Gabriele Paolacci, and Stefano 
Puntoni. “Preference for Material Products in Identity-Based 
Consumption.” Journal of Consumer Psychology 32, no. 4 
(2022): 672–679.
Liao, Mengqi and S. Shyam Sundar, “#facebookdown: Time to 
panic or detox? Understanding users’ reactions to social media 
outage.” CHI EA ‘22: Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. April 
2022. dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3491101.3519674.
Melore, Chris. “Libraries are more popular than ever—even as 
people borrow fewer books.” 5 April 2022. studyfinds.org/
libraries-more-popular.
Noorda, Rachel. “The Discourse and Value of Being an Indepen-
dent Publisher.” Mémoires du livre/Studies in Book Culture 10, 
no. 2 (2019).
Noorda, Rachel and Kathi Inman Berens. Immersive Media and 
Books 2020. panoramaproject.org/immersive-media 
-reading-2020.
Pew Research Center, “The Whys and Hows of Generational 
Research,” September 3, 2015, pewresearch.org/ 
politics/2015/09/03/the-whys-and-hows-of-generations 
-research.
Potash, Steve. “Macmillan Publishes a Work of Fiction” [blog 
post] 1 August 2019. overdrivesteve.com/macmillan 
-publishes-a-work-of-fiction.
Raphael, Rina. “Netflix CEO Reed Hastings: Sleep Is Our  
Competition” Fast Company. 6 November 2017.  
fastcompany.com/40491939/netflix-ceo-reed-hastings 
-sleep-is-our-competition.
Rea, Amy. “Reading Through the Ages.” Library Journal 144, no. 12 
(December 15, 2019): 16–20. libraryjournal.com/story/ 
Reading-Through-the-Ages-Generational-Reading-Survey.
Rich, Hallie. “Stakeholder Interviews About Ebook Data.” [Report 
for ALA.] Draft. 2022.
Squires, Claire. “The Passion and Pragmatism of the Small 
Publisher.” In The Contemporary Small Press, pp. 199–218. 
Palgrave Macmillan, Cham, 2020.
Tyson, Alec, Brian Kennedy, and Cary Funk. “Gen Z, Millen-
nials Stand Out for Climate Change Activism, Social Media 
Engagement With Issue.” 26 May 2021. pewresearch.org/
science/2021/05/26/gen-z-millennials-stand-out-for-climate-
change-activism-social-media-engagement-with-issue.
Vogels, Emily A., Risa Gelles-Watnick, and Navid Massarat. 
“Teens, Social Media and Technology 2022.” Pew 
Research Center. 10 August 2022. pewresearch.org/

19
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
internet/2022/08/10/teens-social-media-and 
-technology-2022.
WordsRated, “State of US Public Libraries—More Popular & 
Digital Than Ever.”  17 Feb 2022. wordsrated.com/state-of-us 
-public-libraries.
Zickhur, Kathryn and Lee Rainie. “Younger Americans’ Relation-
ships with Public Libraries.” 10 September 2014. pewresearch 
.org/internet/2014/09/10/younger-americans-relationships 
-with-public-libraries
Zuboff, Shoshana. The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight 
for a Human Future at the New Frontier of Power. Public 
Affairs, 2019.
ENDNOTES  
1. Dimock, Michael, “Defining Generations: Where Millennials 
End and Gen Z Begins”, Pew Research Center, January 17, 
2019, pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/01/17/where 
-millennials-end-and-generation-z-begins
2. Pew Research Center, “The Whys and Hows of Generational 
Research,” September 3, 2015, pewresearch.org/ 
politics/2015/09/03/the-whys-and-hows-of-generations 
-research.
3. See Methodology section below.
4. Approximately 400 U.S. public libraries can provide access 
to 1000 Audible “original” titles through the Palace app from 
the Digital Public Library of America [DPLA] Exchange, as 
of May 2023, according to Michael Blackwell, Director of 
the St. Mary’s County [Maryland] library. 20,000+ Audible 
titles should be available through Palace by the end of 2024. 
However, Blackwell notes, “none of these titles are avail-
able through OverDrive (which has about 90% of the library 
market), so it could be argued that in effect many [public] 
libraries will not have access” to Amazon’s subscription-only 
content. There are no known licensing arrangements between 
public libraries and Naver’s Webtoon or Radish.
5. Vogels, Emily A., Risa Gelles-Watnick, and Navid Massarat. 
“Teens, Social Media and Technology 2022.” Pew Research 
Center. 10 August 2022. pewresearch.org/internet/2022/08/10/
teens-social-media-and-technology-2022.
6. Gen Z person (Jordan) quoted in Katz et al., Gen Z, Explained, 
p.11. The book summarizes the findings of a multiyear, 
multidisciplinary, interview-based study conducted primarily 
on three college campuses. It was sponsored by the Knight 
Foundation and housed at Stanford University’s Center for 
Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences.
7. See: Bailey, Erica R. et al. “Authentic self-expression on social 
media is associated with greater subjective well-being” 6 Oct. 
2020 in Nature Communication 11, 4889 (2020). nature 
.com/articles/s41467-020-18539-w. And: Liao, Mengqi and 
S. Shyam Sundar, “#facebookdown: Time to panic or detox? 
Understanding users’ reactions to social media outage.” CHI 
EA ‘22: Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems. April 2022. dl.acm.org/
doi/10.1145/3491101.3519674.
8. Geiger, “Millennials are the most likely generation of 
 Americans to use public libraries,” June 21, 2017, pew 
research.org/fact-tank/2017/06/21/millennials-are-the- 
most-likely-generation-of-americans-to-use-public 
-libraries.
9. “Among those ages 16–29, the percentage who visited a public 
library in person in the previous [twelve months] dropped 
from 58% in November 2012 to 50% in September 2013, 
with the largest drop occurring among 18–24 year-olds.” See 
Zickuhr and Rainie (2014), the section “Relationships with 
public libraries.”
10. “State of US Public Libraries—More Popular & Digital Than 
Ever.” WordsRated. February 17, 2022. wordsrated.com/state 
-of-us-public-libraries.
11. Noorda and Berens (2020). Note that the survey population in 
that study screened for people 1) were 18 years or older and 2) 
who had engaged with at least one book, in any format and in 
any context, during the previous twelve months.
12. Guy LeCharles Gonzalez, “Marketing Math: Penguin Random 
House’s 2 Percent Gambit”, Quoted in Friedman, The Hot 
Sheet September 14, 2022.
13. Italie, Hillel, “‘Nothing else felt guaranteed anymore so why 
not just try to be happy?’ The indie bookstore revivalists reveal 
how they made a big comeback”, Fortune, May 22, 2023, 
fortune.com/2023/05/22/independent-bookstores 
-surge-pandemic-community-entrepreneurs.
14. publiclibrariesonline.org/2017/06/retail-co-location-coffee 
-at-the-library.
15. Statista. “Global number of users of South Korean online 
service Naver Webtoon from 2019 to June 2022.” statista.com/
statistics/1291529/naver-webtoon-global-user-number.
16. For a fascinating look into how Kindle Vella is faring two years 
after launch, see this Reddit thread: “Is Kindle Vella Dead as a 
Strategy” [for self-publishing authors]: reddit.com/r/ 
selfpublish/comments/10kgr3m/is_kindle_vella_dead 
_as_a_strategy.
17. See also in this report section 4.1 “Amazon Frames Gen Z and 
Millennial Book Expectations.”
18. Serial reading platforms have different modes of incentivizing 
payment. For example, Webtoon offers a single-read “fast pass” 
and “coins” to permanently unlock the content. On the fiction 
app Radish, new updates make older episodes eligible to be 
read for free. Readers must “wait until the episode you want to 
read has the hourglass symbol next to it, rather than the lock” to 
read. There’s a gamified element to reading in these contexts.

20
Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use
19. There are many books and other resources about the attention 
economy. See, for example, Shoshana Zuboff’s The Age of 
Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the 
New Frontier of Power (2019).
20. “Talent” refers to creators across media, such as authors, 
livestreamers, comics artists, professional gamers, podcasters, 
and comedians.
21. Social lists are recommendation lists on online social platforms 
such as Instagram, Reddit, and Discord.
22. Vogels et al., 2022.
23. Kristen McLean, NPD analyst, discussed the role of TikTok in 
driving the “70 percent of overall gains” in Q1 of 2022 book 
sales. Quoted in Friedman, The Hot Sheet 27 April 2022. 
mailchi.mp/hotsheetpub/nft-issue?e=6cd1ad34c1.
24. A touchpoint is any time a customer comes into contact with a 
product, before, during or after sale.
25. Dwyer, Kate. “Kaia, Kendall and EmRata Are Taking a Page 
From Oprah.” New York Times. 9 March 2021. nytimes.com/ 
2021/03/09/style/kaia-gerber-book-club-kendall-jenner 
-emily-ratajkowski-belletrist.html.
26. David C. Edelman, Harvard Business School professor of AI 
and marketing, quoted in “How to Bring AI Into Your Digital 
Marketing Strategy.” clickz.com/how-to-bring-ai-into-your 
-digital-marketing-strategy/267393.
27. Leung, Eugina, Maria Cristina Cito, Gabriele Paolacci, and 
Stefano Puntoni. “Preference for Material Products in Identity- 
Based Consumption.” Journal of Consumer Psychology 32, no. 
4 (2022): 672–679.
28. Noorda and Berens (2020). Note that the survey population in 
that study screened for people 1) were 18 years or older and 2) 
who had engaged with at least one book, in any format and in 
any context, during the previous twelve months.
29. Statista. statista.com/statistics/199012/number-of-barnes 
-noble-stores-by-type-and-year-since-2005.
30. Albanese, Andrew. “ALA Midwinter 2020: Macmillan CEO 
John Sargent, Librarians Spar Over E-book Embargo.” 
Publishers Weekly. 26 January 2020. publishersweekly.com/
pw/by-topic/industry-news/libraries/article/82261-ala 
-midwinter-2020-macmillan-ceo-john-sargent-librarians 
-spar-over-e-book-embargo.html.
31. Andrew Albanese reported: “In a June 13 [2022] opinion and 
order, Judge Deborah L. Boardman declared Maryland’s library 
ebook law [mandating “reasonable terms”] ‘unconstitutional 
and unenforceable’” because it violated the Copyright Act. 
See Albanese, “Maryland Library Ebook Law,” publisher-
sweekly.com/pw/by-topic/industry-news/libraries/article/ 
89598-in-final-order-court-declares-maryland-s-library 
-e-book-law-unconstitutional.html.
32. Noorda and Berens (2020).
33. Ibid.
34. Fraser-Arnott, Melissa. “Exploring public library identity 
through mission statements.” Public Library Quarterly 41, no. 3 
(2022): 236–256.
35. Crawford Barniskis, Shannon. “Deconstructing the mission: A 
critical content analysis of public library mission statements.” 
The Library Quarterly 86, no. 2 (2016): 135–152.
36. Hessekiel, David. “Values & Value: The Gen Z Paradox.” 
forbes.com/sites/davidhessekiel/2022/10/24/values--value 
-the-gen-z-paradox/?sh=35c18a1c273b.
37. Berens and Noorda, “News You Can Use: Why Is Amazon a 
“Library” for GenZ and Millennials? And What Should Librar-
ians Do About It?” American Library Association Conference 
2022, July 26, 2022.
The American Library Association (“ALA”) is the foremost national organization providing resources 
to inspire library and information professionals to transform their communities through essential 
programs and services. For more than 140 years, the ALA has been the trusted voice for academic, 
public, school, government and special libraries, advocating for the profession and the library’s role in 
enhancing learning and ensuring access to information for all. For more information, visit ala.org.
For further information about this publication, contact:
Dr. Kathi Inman Berens, Portland State University, kberens@pdx.edu 
Dr. Rachel Noorda, Portland State University, rnoorda@pdx.edu 
Alan Inouye, American Library Association, ainouye@alawash.org
Published November 2023. © 2023 American Library Association. 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution License, 
available at: creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/.  cb
