 
  Türk Kütüphaneciliği, 39, 3(2025), 365-373 
Doi: 10.24146/tk.1745301 
 
* Ankara Yıldırım Beyazıt Üniversitesi, Bilgi ve Belge Yönetimi Bölümü, Ankara, Türkiye. E-posta: demetsoylu@aybu.edu.tr 
Ankara Yıldırım Beyazıt University, Department of Information and Document Management, Ankara, Türkiye. E-mail: 
demetsoylu@aybu.edu.tr 
** Ankara Yıldırım Beyazıt Üniversitesi, Yönetim Bilişim Sistemleri Bölümü, Ankara, Türkiye. E-posta: tuncmedeni@gmail.com 
Ankara Yıldırım Beyazıt University, Department of Management Information Systems, Ankara, Türkiye. E-mail: 
tuncmedeni@gmail.com  
 
Geliş Tarihi - Received: 18.07.2025; Kabul Tarihi - Accepted: 18.09.2025; Yayımlanma Tarihi - Published: 30.09.2025  
 
 
Design of an Escape Room Game: Practical Clues and Ideas for Librarians 
 
Kaçış Odası Oyunu Tasarımı: Kütüphaneciler için Pratik İpuçları ve Fikirler 
 
Demet SOYLU* , Tunç Durmuş MEDENİ**  
 
 
Abstract 
Escape rooms, an increasingly popular gaming tool today, are playful designs centered around 
a specific theme or scenario, designed to trigger emotional components in players, including 
excitement, suspense, a desire to explore and solve puzzles, and a motivation to succeed. Escape 
rooms challenge players to progress through the game flow within a mysterious gaming 
adventure, completing tasks, solving riddles, and puzzles within a given time limit. In escape 
rooms, the player's primary motivation is based on their desire to succeed and their 
determination to escape the room. The game can sometimes  involve a single room or multiple 
rooms. Escape rooms are used as a gamified pedagogical tool to facilitate interactive learning 
in educational and learning environments, as well as in information centers such as libraries 
and museums. This study aims to provide practical tips and ideas for designing escape room 
games that cater to the evolving educational landscape of the 21st century, particularly in 
libraries and museums. Within the scope of the study, the escape room design idea of the 
research titled “ALPHABET DETECTIVE: Saving the Alphabet in the Ancient Library” was 
shared. 
Keywords: Escape Room Game; Library; Museum 
 
Introduction 
Designing user-centered designs and services for university library users is essential to enhance 
their inclusion. Escape rooms are live puzzle games where players are locked in a room, need 
to find clues, and solve puzzles to escape the room. Establishing an exciting atmosphere is 
significant, as it will be a new experience for the user (Claunch et al., 2023).  They are 
situationally themed with participants solving some mystery. An escape room is a live -action 
experience in which a group of people is locked inside a room and must work together to break 
out. Once inside, participants are presented with an array of puzzles, c lues, and riddles that, 
when solved, will allow them to escape. Over the years, these recreational activities have 
become increasingly popular (Fountaine, 2020). Escape rooms are an excellent avenue for 
entertainment. By design, they are mysteries needing to be solved. Often, they require 
participants to search a designated area for items and clues physically and to solve riddles, 
puzzles, and other conundrums to “escape” the room (Claunch, 2023).  Archeology dig, haunted 
house, bank/vault heist, prison bre ak, lab accident, sinking submarine/boat, con artist theft 
(Wolph et al, 2018). 


366 Okuyucu Mektubu / Reader Letters                                                 Demet SOYLU, Tunç Durmuş MEDENİ 
 
The design of an escape room is a collaborative effort, and it requires a dynamic team.  While 
playing the game, groups of librarians should accompany the players and guide the m. 
According to Kapp (2012), an escape room game should encompass various game components, 
including goals, rules, conflict, competition, cooperation, time constraints, rewards, feedback, 
levels, storytelling, curiosity, and repetition. The best way to begin the design stage is to create 
a flowchart of your game and its puzzles, plan the stories within the game, outline the conflicts, 
challenges, and competition process, and define the game rules.  
 
 The game scenario should be written, and the game targets should be set. Creating a 
good, interesting game storyline is significant. It is the key point that should attract the 
attention of your target group. The story should be basic, understandable, and short. 
Otherwise, the attention of the target group might be distracted.  
 
Example:” You are trapped in an ancient library in Trinity College. The walls echo past 
lives. You hear the voices of the oldest librarians who have walked through the corridors of this 
ancient library. There are lost memories in the library. In each lost memory, there is a clue. 
Each clue will help you to exit the library. Are you ready to travel back in time? Find the clues 
in old memories through time travel. History will help you to solve the riddle.” 
 
 Adding mystery and fantasy to the game is another key dimension (Escape Room Geeks, 
2024). Mystery is the inviting feature of the game that adds cheer, enjoyment, and 
eagerness to discover. If we want our target group to proceed wit h the game flow, 
enabling them to feel the ecstasy of joy and delicate sentiments. 
 Adding a component of pressure and locating challenges is another significant aspect 
within a game flow. Adding time limitations and setting deadlines for tasks will 
contribute to creating excitement (Escape Room Geeks, 2024).  
 To prepare an immersive game flow, creating puzzles is crucial.  Puzzle themes can 
include a spy mission, a haunted house, a lab experiment gone wrong, an ancient library 
concept, or an ancient tomb. C ipher puzzles that use a hidden message in Morse code 
can be employed. In addition, puzzle boxes can be prepared within the frame of the 
game. Jigsaw puzzles and pendulum magic can be added.1 
 
Example on the use of a pendulum:  
Pulling the Hidden Key with a Magnetic Pendulum  
A metal ball (or magnet) that swings like a pendulum hangs from a string, a magnetic switch 
(inside a plastic tube) is located beneath or behind the floor. Players must swing the pendulum 
in the right direction to remove the switch or drop it into place. Players can use a clue, such as 
a map, diagram, or compass, to determine the direction of the pendulum.  
                                            
1 A pendulum is a weight suspended by a rope or chain that moves back and forth or in a circular motion. In an 
escape room, this motion can be used to trigger a mechanism, reveal hidden text or shapes, or reach a specific 
area. 

Design of an Escape Room Game: Practical Clues and Ideas for Librarians 
Kaçış Odası Oyunu Tasarımı: Kütüphaneciler için Pratik İpuçları ve Fikirler                                                                                           367 
 
Revealing a Password with a Pendulum 
The password written in UV paint on the table is usually invisible. The pendulum has a UV 
light at its tip. Players slowly reveal the password by swinging the pendulum in a specific 
direction. As the pendulum swings gradually, the UV light makes the writing visible at regular 
intervals. Players can unlock another lock by reading the password. 
               
Example of Using a Puzzle Box 
A riddle can be placed inside a box. When the players solve the riddle correctly, a key will be 
given to them to open the gate of the second room.  
        Example riddle: “I  have cities, but no cities and towns.  I have hills, mountains, but no 
flowers and insects.  I have oceans and seas, but no ships and fish.” (Answer: MAP) 
         
 Creating tasks is another significant phase in escape room design frameworks. It has the 
strong potential to enrich and shape the learning experience. Tasks should be scenario-based 
and include challenges, with a time limitation. Players should be  
 
Task and Activity Examples 
Scent of the Book 
“Each book from a different era has a different scent. Victorian -era books are filled with the 
scent of lavender. Are you ready to discover which era of the book? Let’s solve the puzzle by 
discovering the scents. A time traveler has brought books from different eras to the present day, 
but has mixed them up. Finding the era to which each book be longs means unlocking the key 
to the past. Each era carries its own unique scent” (During the design process of the task, scent 
cards are located between the pages of the books.). “Your mission: “ Match the books to the 
correct eras based on their scents and reach the final key.” 
             “Smell the books and match with the era” 
Lavender  Victorian Age 
Rose water     Ottoman Period 
Pine resin Viking Age 
Sandalwood        Medieval Age Indian Manuscripts 
Tobacco   American Novel of 1920s 
The example shared above can be adapted to various escape room designs. The idea can 
be enriched and revised according to the type of library game that will be played. 
Players are requested to guess the period by smelling the books and reading the clues 
contained within (e.g., a poem, date, language style). 
 
 
 
 

368 Okuyucu Mektubu / Reader Letters                                                 Demet SOYLU, Tunç Durmuş MEDENİ 
 
Live Book  
Live Book is another idea that can be implemented in libraries/museums as an interactive 
learning experience. 
“Ask me who I am. Scan my QR and I will tell you about my story. If you are curious 
about my story and me, I will tell you.  If you are looking for the clue, the clue is hidden 
in the story. If you are a good listener, you will discover the code:)” 
 
Alphabet Detective: Saving the Alphabet in the Ancient Library 
Within this study, the design of ALPHABET DETECTIVE: Saving the Alphabet in the Ancient 
Library game was introduced.  In this part of the story, scenario and game tasks were given.  
 
Scenario and Story of the Game 
It was designed as an escape room game. The players will be requested to find the “Lost 
Alphabet” in the old and dusty shelves of the old library. The game scenario is flowing as 
follows: 
“In the time machine, we have travelled to another time span on another planet in the 
universe. On this planet, no one speaks any of the languages used in the world. We do not know 
in which era we are, and we do not have any knowledge about the alphabet they use. The time 
machine has brought us to an ancient library, which preserves the map of this new planet we 
inhabit and the alphabet of the civilization that lives here. Your role is to follow all the 
instructions, clues, and solve the puzzles. When you manage to fulfill your duties in all the 
rooms of the ancient library, you will get the magical key to the Secret Room. Now, the time is 
running out.” 
“The language is unknown. The letters are undefined. The knowledge is unknown. The 
only way to survive: to make sense of it. If you don’t start to discover and learn the language, 
your destiny will be to get lost in the dusty shelves of the librar y. You should be quick. Do not 
forget that you will encounter symbols and signs in each room that provide clues and hints 
about the alphabet of this alien civilization. These symbols and signs will give you some idea 
about the culture, geography, traditions, and lifestyle of this alien civilization.  
At the beginning of the game, players are (two groups, each group has three persons) 
invited to the Starting Room. (It can be any room in the library you can choose. However, the 
room should be designed mysteri ously. In this game, the Alphabet and a map of the alien 
civilization are lost. To survive on this new planet, players should complete all the tasks given 
in each new library room. Players have to follow the clues in the library. In different sections 
of the library, there are clues. They are located behind the paintings, in the reference desk, and 
between the shelves. Every point can be used to locate the clues. In the First Room, players 
start the game. This room was specially designed. Players should be requested to examine the 
room. The following note should be given to the players: 
   “When the time machine stops, a profound silence falls around you. Not a bird's song, 
not a breath of wind... Just a heavy void swallowing your existence. The place you se t foot on 
belongs to no world you know. The sky is filled with star dust. You are not familiar with it. The 

Design of an Escape Room Game: Practical Clues and Ideas for Librarians 
Kaçış Odası Oyunu Tasarımı: Kütüphaneciler için Pratik İpuçları ve Fikirler                                                                                           369 
 
smell of the star dust is everywhere. Time is non -linear here. Past, present, and future are 
flowing into each other. There are moments when you feel as if the past and future are the same. 
There are moments when you can travel to the future. Now, gigantic library doors are opening. 
On its door, an inscription carved with unknown symbols reads: -The one who knows the 
alphabet will be saved. This is th e Ancient Library, holding the ancient wisdom of the planet. 
Feel the serenity. Feel the echoes of the past, future, and now. Feel the moment. Touch the walls 
and hear the messages.” 
 
Tasks in the Game 
Level 1:  Card Game (Matching the cards) 
On some cards , concepts are given. On the other cards, definitions of the cards are given. 
Players are asked to match the concepts with their corresponding definitions. 
(Concepts: Information literacy, information retrieval, call number, dark web, self -
check, media literacy, LC classification system) 
 
Level 2:  Book Face  
Sharing a photo on the library’s Instagram page with the book cover (The book can be an 
autobiography or biography, having a picture of a person) 
“Along with the clue you just uncovered, there's a book—an old one, with a striking 
cover. To proceed, pose creatively by matching your face or body to the book cover to create a 
playful illusion. Let the book become part of you.” 
“Take a photo using the book cover—make sure it blends with your face or body.” 
“Share the photo on your Instagram, tagging our library’s official account.” 
“Show your post to the game observer.” 
“Only then will you receive the next clue on where to go in the library.” 
 
Level 3: “Who am I?”  
In this part, the players will be tested on their knowledge of the librarians working in different 
sections of the library (They visit the library, borrow a book, but the question is whether they 
know the librarians and their duties). In this part of the game, the librarian will give a question 
card to the player.  
The statements below are given to the player: 
The question is as follows: “Who is the librarian at the reference desk? What is his/her 
role?” “(The question can be multiplied according to the sec tions of your library). Look 
around. Somewhere in this room—or perhaps in your mind—is the answer.” 
“Your mission is to solve the riddle.” 
“Once you know who or what it refers to, tell the observer. If you’re right, the next clue 
will be revealed.” 
“You should look around. The librarians might be carrying your clue as well.” 

370 Okuyucu Mektubu / Reader Letters                                                 Demet SOYLU, Tunç Durmuş MEDENİ 
 
 
Level 4:  A Journey Between the Cities 
First task: “You should make a catalogue search on Greece and find the book on the shelves.”   
Second task: “You should make a catalogue search on Egyptian History and find the book on 
the shelves.” 
If players do not know how to perform a catalogue search, they can ask a librarian for 
help. But in this game, there is a time limitation. Asking the librarian and learning how to make 
the search will take time, but it is up to the decision of the group.  
The players will be given clue cards on which section of the library to go.  
 
Level 5: Information Verification 
In this part of the game, players are given misleading and suspicious cases, social media posts, 
or fake news. They are requested to verify the data and news. 
“Restore the truth and uncover the source of the misinformation. Your clues are hidden 
across the library.” 
 An article with a suspicious quote—but who actually said it? 
 A social media post with an image—can you trace its origin? 
 A news video—can you spot the editing trick 
 A headline that contradicts historical records—can you find the original? 
To complete your mission, you must compare articles across different sources. 
Use date-checkers, information verification web sites and reverse image search tools. 
 
Level 6: Treasure Hunt 
On a certain shelf number, duty is hidden. The call number of the shelf is given to the players, 
and among the books, they can find the riddle or puzzle. (You can see the book using the shelf 
number written on the catalog card.) 
In the puzzle, there are questions: (There can be different answer cards. The players can 
choose the correct options.) 
1-To whom does this image belong?   
Albert Einstein 
When was the first Eurovision song contest held? 
(1956) 
2-How many members are there in the European Parliament? 
(720 as of 2024). 
3-What does P mean in the LC classification system? 
 
 
 

Design of an Escape Room Game: Practical Clues and Ideas for Librarians 
Kaçış Odası Oyunu Tasarımı: Kütüphaneciler için Pratik İpuçları ve Fikirler                                                                                           371 
 
 
Level 7: Dewey Challenge 
Players will find the books which were classified according to the Dewey Classification System 
according to the clues given. 
 
Table 1 
Example activities 
Title of the Book Clue 
“Short History of the Time” “Dust of the universe is hidden in the star dust” 
“Renaissance Art” “Secret hand touch portrayed the God” 
“Fundamentals of psychology” “Let’s go to your inner world. Are you ready to discover 
the inner yourself” 
“Libraries and Knowledge” “The scent of knowledge is hidden in the silence” 
“Diet and Health” “The remedy lies in the unprecedented unity of nature 
and science” 
“Fundamentals of Economy” “It questions the money” 
 
Level 8: Hunting for Puzzle Pieces  
Break a quote or a map into 4–5 puzzle pieces and hide each piece inside different genres (e.g. 
fiction, history, art). 
 
Level 9: Photo Hunt 
The librarians should give the photos of the places (reference desk, entrance of the library, shelf, 
certain call number, or a certain chosen spot in the library). Players will be asked to visit these 
locations and locate the quizzes.  
 
Level 10: The librarian needs help 
It is a busy day in the library. All librarians are rushing in the library. Many books have to be 
classified according to the LC classification system.  
Your task is “Some books are waiting for you. You need to classify them according to th e LC 
Classification System. If you do not know the LC classification system, you can apply to the 
Educational Box. There are LC cards in the box. They may help you. You can use them as a 
guide.” 
“After getting the cards and having the relevant information,  go to the special table and the 
books are waiting there. 
Book titles are as follows: “German Law”,   “Charlotte’s Web”, “The Second World War”, 
“The Silk Roads: New History of the World”, “The Natural History Book: The Ultimate Visual 
Guide to Everything on Earth”. 
 

372 Okuyucu Mektubu / Reader Letters                                                 Demet SOYLU, Tunç Durmuş MEDENİ 
 
 
 
Level 11: Plagiarism Master (The library detective is after you?) 
Five short paragraphs are given to the players. Two of them should be cited correctly. In one of 
the paragraphs, the citation will be correct, but the reference will not be given in the references 
list. Two of them will be copied from a resource but not cited. 
“Are you ready to identify the plagiarism, and do you want to cooperate with us? “ 
Once all levels are completed, players are directed to the final room of the game. They will 
follow the clues and are supposed to find a special note indicating where the lost alphabet and 
map are located. They will go to the Secret Room to see the map and alphabet.  The player 
group that completes the game levels faster will win the prizes. 
 
Results 
This study provided practical insights and ideas that can be utilized and adapted as an interactive 
and educational tool, leveraging entertainment and motivation. These interactive learning 
designs combine gamification methodologies, frameworks, and experiential learning methods. 
Escape room designs aim to improve the problem -solving skills of users, triggering emotions 
such as excitement, curiosity, and a desire to achieve and reach targets.  Escape room designs 
framed as information literacy games improve  the information literacy skills of users and 
contribute to the process of library orientation.  
As an escape room game, “Alphabet Detective: Saving the Alphabet in the Ancient 
Library” enables users to experience the process of information seeking, catalo ging, 
verification, classification, and utilizing information in an ethical manner in a fun and gamified 
way.  Gamified tasks and game challenges, based upon a story, invite the users to discover the 
game and interact with the tasks. In the pursuit of solv ing the puzzle and understanding the 
tasks, the users engage in creative exploration, critical thinking, and collaboration.  
In conclusion, escape room games are learner -centered game designs and frameworks 
that support the learning process of individuals. They can be used in different library types, and 
the theme of the escape room games can change according to special days or different contexts 
selected by the library. The game rules, scenario, and game flow can also be determined based 
on the special des ign of the library. This will enable libraries to promote their services while 
creatively enhancing user interaction and engagement.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Design of an Escape Room Game: Practical Clues and Ideas for Librarians 
Kaçış Odası Oyunu Tasarımı: Kütüphaneciler için Pratik İpuçları ve Fikirler                                                                                           373 
 
Permission and Contribution Statements 
Ethics Committee Approval 
The author declared that the article did not require ethics committee approval. 
Authorship Contribution 
Demet Soylu: Idea/Concept, Conceptual Background, Game Design and Writing, Writing 
Escape Room Game Rules, Writing, Evaluation, and Review 
Tunç Durmuş Medeni: Conceptual Background, Game Design and  Writing, Writing Escape 
Room Game Rules, Writing, Evaluation, and Review 
 
References 
Claunch, K., Katembe, M. and Ussery, F. (2023). Creating an academic library escape room: An 
outreach and assessment experience.  Journal of Library Engagement and Outreach. 136-153. 
Escape Room Geeks (2024).  Step-by-step guide: How I created my own thrilling DIY escape room.  
DIY Escape Room at Home: Step-by-Step Guide 
Fountaine, L. (2020). Breaking out of the ordinary: Using BreakOutEDU and Escape Rooms in the 
Academic Library. Games and Gamification in Academic Libraries   
Kapp, K. (2012). The Gamification of Learning and Instruction. Game -Based Methods and Strategies 
for Training and Education. San Francisco: Pfeiffer.  
Wolph, S.C., Gray, K. and Pool, M. (2018). Designing an escape room game to develop problem-solving 
and spatial reasoning skills. In ASEE IL -IN Section Conference.  Designing an Escape Room  
Game to Develop Problem Solving and Spatial Reasoning Skills 
 
 
 
