19NOVEMBER 2006
From Content to Context:
Videogames as Designed Experience
Kurt Squire
Interactive immersive entertainment, or videogame playing, has
emerged as a major entertainment and educational medium. As re-
search and development initiatives proliferate, educational re-
searchers might beneﬁt by developing more grounded theories about
them. This article argues for framing game play as a 
designed experi-
ence. Players’ understandings are developed through cycles of perfor-
mance within the gameworlds, which instantiate particular theories of
the world (ideological worlds). Players develop new identities both
through game play and through the gaming communities in which these
identities are enacted. Thus research that examines game-based learn-
ing needs to account for both kinds of interactions within the game-
world and in broader social contexts. Examples from curriculum
developed for 
Civilization III and Supercharged! show how games can
communicate powerful ideas and open new identity trajectories for
learners.
A
lthough beneath the radar of many educators, Novem-
ber 9, 2004, was the largest-grossing media day in
world history. No, the occasion was not the release of
Spiderman2 or the latest Star Wars movie. The $125 million
grossed on November 9 was for Halo 2, the anticipated sequel
to the hit Xbox game Halo. Immersive interactive digital enter-
tainment, or videogame playing, has emerged as an important
medium exerting tremendous economic, cultural, and social in-
ﬂuence. Many of today’s youth spend more time playing in dig-
ital worlds than they do watching television, reading, or watching
ﬁlms (Funk, Hagen, & Schimming, 1999; Williams, 2003). How
is all this time that is spent living in virtual worlds affecting peo-
ple, schools, and our society? How will students react to the
“grammar” of traditional schooling when they can buy entire
“worlds in a box” for $50 (Gee, 2004; Squire, 2002)? The impor-
tance of gaming for education might best be summarized by the
rhetorical question an elementary school student raised at the
Game Developer’s Conference: “Why read about ancient Rome
when I can build it?” (Moulder, 2004). Survey studies suggest that
game experiences are changing a generation’s attitudes toward
work and learning. However, these studies are largely overlooked
by educators (Beck & Wade, 2004).
Games are an important site of a shift toward a 
culture of sim-
ulation, whereby digital technologies make it possible to con-
struct, investigate, and interrogate hypothetical worlds that are
increasingly a part of how we work and play (Turkle, 1995).
Simulations play an increasingly important role in everything
from conducting scientiﬁc inquiry to predicting the weather, to
debating the future of Social Security (Casti, 1997; Starr, 1994;
Wolfram, 2002). For the lay public, however, the medium of
videogames is most often our ﬁrst entrée into the culture of sim-
ulation (Starr). Videogame players can lead civilizations, ﬂy air-
craft, lead squadrons of urban warriors in foreign countries, or
participate in virtual societies with their own languages, cultures,
and economies (Squire, 2002; Steinkuehler, in press b). Consider
Full Spectrum Warrior,a game designed by the U.S. Army in con-
junction with the University of Southern California, which is
both an urban warfare training tool and a commercial entertain-
ment videogame where ordinary citizens can lead squadrons in
urban environments. But games are not just static code; rather, they
are sociotechnical networks. For example, 
America’s Army is the
$8 million game developed by the U.S. Army to attract new recruits.
Not only does America’s Army encode the Army’s values into the
game play, but it is also designed so that veterans, military person-
nel, and civilians can play together, creating an Army-owned space
to interact with the public (Li, 2004).
America’s Army and Full Spectrum Warrior are obvious, if not
controversial, examples of the experiences that games can pro -
vide. However, a deeper look into gaming reveals a plethora of
experiences available for children (and adults) that are more or
less unknown in school. Farming and town simulators such as
Animal Crossing and Harvest Moon, games aimed at younger
children and available on the Nintendo GameBoy, make it pos-
sible to plan and plant crops, pay off mortgages, and essentially
run a farm. Disney’s 
Toontown allows kids from around the
world to interact in a realtime 3D world where they meet and
chat with other kids, engage in collaborative quests, and outﬁ t
their own furnishings (Mine, Shocet, & Hughston, 2003). For
an even more dramatic example, consider a Chinese 16-year-old
playing the Korean-based game 
Lineage, in which she becomes an
international ﬁnancier, trading raw materials, buying and selling
goods, and speculating on currencies bought up by players in 
Europe and North America (Steinkuehler, 2004b). While video-
games can be thought of as an extension of earlier media, clearly
today’s Internet connectivity, computational power, and 3D ren-
dering ability make whole new kinds of experiences available
outside school.
In this article, I argue that educators (especially curriculum de-
signers) ought to pay closer attention to videogames because they
offer 
designed experiences, in which participants learn through a
grammar of doing and being. Until recently, there has been little
study of the medium or of the implications of its attendant socialEducational Researcher, Vol. 35, No. 8, pp. 19–29

EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER20
structures for formal education (see Gee, 2003; McFarlane,
Sparrowhawk, & Heald, 2002; Squire, 2004; Steinkuehler, in
press a). However, “serious” games, or games used for purposes
other than entertainment, are entering most public spheres and
are estimated to be a $75 million annual industry, growing to per-
haps $1 billion by the end of the decade (Erwin, 2005). Groups
as diverse as the U.S. military, the National Association of Home
Builders, and the National Alliance (a neo-Nazi organization) in-
vest in games that represent their ideological views; but traditional
educational interests are much slower to respond and less well
represented within the serious games movement. Corporations,
the military, and nonproﬁts are turning to games to express their
ideologies; the challenge for K–12 educators is not just how to re-
spond, but also how to mobilize and make available their own
ideological views.
To date, educational research that treats videogames seriously
has been slim, with the bulk of existing work examining represen-
tations in games. However, a mature body of educational games
scholarship should address three interrelated areas: the critical
study of games as participation in ideological systems, “learning as
performance,” and educational games as designed experiences.
Central to the serious study of games are questions of how players
make sense of these digitally mediated experiences: If games are
“possibility spaces,” then researchers need to account for how play-
ers inhabit them and the mechanisms by which meanings become
interpreted from these experiences. For educators designing games,
this shifts the question from one of “delivering content” to one of
“designing experience.” Many important questions persist—such
as how games create and mobilize hybrid identities for players, and
how these identities are enacted across contexts. However, given
the contradictions between the grammar of games and the gram-
mar of schooling, a bigger question looms: How will students react
to the “designed experience of schooling” with its attending po-
tential identities? Right now, it appears that corporations, the mil-
itary, and private interests are ready to capitalize on this mismatch
between the compelling learning potentials of educational media
and schools’ slowness to react to the changes. As these other groups
leverage games toward their political agendas, the question is how
the public sector will respond.
Games as Participation in Ideological Worlds
In a 2002 Missouri court decision on the legality of restricting ac-
cess to violent videogames ( Interactive Digital Software Associa-
tion v. St. Louis County, 2002), Senior U.S. District Judge
Stephen N. Limbaugh wrote:
This court reviewed four different video games and found no con-
veyance of ideas, expression, or anything else that could possibly
amount to speech. The court ﬁnds that video games have more in
common with board games and sports than they do with motion
pictures.
Eventually, the 8th Circuit Court overturned Limbaugh’s deci-
sion, with Judge Morris S. Arnold writing that videogames “are as
much entitled to the protection of free speech as the best of liter-
ature’” (
Interactive Digital Software Association v. St. Louis County,
2003, p. 5). Indeed, most games communities and the games press
picked up on the logical contradiction behind Limbaugh’s deci-
sion: If games cannot represent a point of view, then why care who
plays them? (See Figure 1.) The notion that Grand Theft Auto:
San Andreas or Deus Ex 2 might communicate ideas is becoming
increasingly accepted, but research and theory on how to make
sense of games as interactive texts lags behind. Contemporary
criticism of games—from a multiplicity of perspectives—assumes
that the 
presence of violence or misogyny in a game world is nec-
essarily equated with advocating violence or misogyny and thus
creates violent or misogynist attitudes in players.
To illustrate the problem with this view, it is worth examining
Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas,a controversial game representing
aspects of 1990s Los Angeles urban culture, as an interactive text.
The player inhabits the character of Carl Johnson, a Black man
who is returning to the city of San Andreas to attend his slain
mother’s funeral. The player is handed a bicycle, which he is told
to ride home, but after the ﬁrst mission the player is more or less
free to do as he or she pleases. The game does not require players
to run over, shoot, or harm a player character in the game; these
are choices that players might make. To be sure, there is a partic-
ular ideology at work in the game. The violent streets of San 
Andreas are rife with gang warfare, and certain actions are rewarded
in ways, while others are not even possible. Thus we can talk about
San Andreas as a world, and it is a world with particular rules that
give consequence to actions. To survive in this world, players need
to learn the underlying rule systems and how they interact.
Of course, 
San Andreas is not “any old world” but a stylized
rendition of 1990s California, containing a mixture of authentic
and ﬁctitious California landmarks and neighborhoods, mostly
in the Los Angeles area. And the “Los Angeles” depicted in 
San
Andreas is not “any old Los Angeles,” but one created by a team
of developers from Dundee, Scotland, most of whom ﬁrst visited
California during preproduction for the game and were a little
FIGURE 1. A Penny-Arcade cartoon mocking Judge Limbaugh’s
ruling. The cartoon was quite popular and represented typical
gamer discourse surrounding the decision. From 
http://www.
penny-arcade.com/view.php3?date=2002-04-26&res=l, repro-
duced with permission of publisher.

surprised that it was not as described in popular media. Thus
San Andreas is a curiously global artifact, the product of a team
of Scottish developers who, having been raised with the ﬁctitious
Los Angeles of N.W.A.’s music and Spike Lee’s ﬁlms, now ex-
port that culture back to Americans. Players are invited to try on
the persona of an inner-city Black gangster, experiencing in styl-
ized form 
some of what it means to live in a 1990s hip-hop world.
For some players, inhabiting Carl Johnson may be an empower-
ing experience, enabling them to understand America’s fear of
and fascination with the urban African American male. Other
players might ponder the limited choices and identities presented
to African American males or representations of African Americans
in popular media, or America’s fetishization and marginalization of
hip-hop culture.
Among game players, the 
Grand Theft Autoseries is most noted
for the free form play it allows. It is common knowledge that most
players never complete a majority of the missions, instead using
the game as a driving- or chase-scene simulator of sorts. For play-
ers, part of what makes 
San Andreasinteresting is the material that
it provides for creating interesting interactions—whether in driving
into the countryside in a “pimped-out” 1970s-style sedan or
stealing a hot dog truck and driving it through a recreation of a
1990s Compton neighborhood. It is critical that researchers ex-
amine what players actually do with games, rather than assuming
that there is any one “game itself” as it is meant to be played.
If a hallmark of games is their 
interactivity,their ability to grant
players agency within the narrative ﬁction of the gameworld and its
rules, then theoretical models need to account for players’ actions
in creating the experience. Indeed, because play is instantiated only
through players’ actions, tensions arise over who exactly is the “au-
thor” of the game experience. As noted game designer Doug
Church (2000) describes, “Our desire to create traditional narra-
tive and exercise authorial control over the gaming world often in-
hibits the players’ ability to involve themselves in the game world”
(cited in Kreimeier, 2000). Many designers have come to see games
as vehicles for player expression, thinking of game design as choreo-
graphing the rules, representations, and roles for players, in other
words the contexts, in which players can generate meaning
(LeBlanc, 2005). As such, game designers “write” the 
parameters
for players’ experience, and the game experience as such is best de-
scribed as an interaction between the game designer and player
(Robison, 2004).
If player agency is central to the medium, then we can only un-
derstand games’ meanings by understanding what players do with
them and the meanings that players construct through these ac-
tions (Malone, 1981; Murray, 1997). Too often, past analyses
have focused on representations in the games or on the games’
surface features, without examining gaming practices or experi -
ences, or the games’ meanings for their players (Jenkins, 1992;
Jenkins, in press; Provenzo, 1991). Whereas traditional critiques
of games have focused solely on the text, images, and animations,
the fact that games can be enacted only through the player re-
quires theoretical models that span the game and its contexts of
consumption. As the case of 
San Andreassuggests, understanding
a game’s context of production may also be important for under-
standing the layers of meaning in a text.
For an example closer to education, take Civilization III (the
third installment of the top selling Civilization franchise), a
strategy game where the player rules a civilization from 4000 B.C.
to the present. The game is based on a geographical-materialist
game system where players build cities to gather resources (food,
natural resources, and commerce; Friedman, 1999). Players also
build cities, engage in trade, and of course wage war, giving rise to
situations such as civilizations negotiating (and perhaps warring)
over scarce resources such as oil. The central features of the game
system present an argument for the fates of civilizations as largely
governed by geographical and materialist processes, an argument
also made by Jared Diamond (1999) in his Pulitzer Prize–winning
Guns, Germs, and Steel.A single game requires about 20 hours to
play, and achieving mastery requires one hundred hours or more
(Squire, in press a).
A number of educators and critics have raised valid concerns
that what players learn from games is not the properties of com-
plex systems but simple heuristics (e.g., one learns the strategic
necessity of always keeping two spearmen in every city). The fear
is that without access to the underlying model, students will fail
to recognize simulation bias or the “hidden curriculum” of what
is left out (see Starr, 1994; Turkle, 2003). In a dissertation study
of poor African American ninth-graders playing 
Civilization III,
Squire (2004) found that most students turned the game into a
simulation of European colonization, asking, Why is it that Eu-
ropeans colonized the Americas, and why did Africans and Asians
not colonize America or Europe? In school, most of these stu-
dents were given a historical narrative of the steady march of
Western liberty, democracy, and rationality (see Dunn, 2000;
Manning, 2003). In contrast, 
Civilization III can offer a story of
advantageous geographical conditions that provides access to
global trade networks, resources, technologies, and limited op-
portunities for population expansion. In the words of one stu-
dent, the game shows “how geography and gold (i.e., materialist
goods) determine how history plays out” (Squire, in press a).
Thus 
Civilization III enlisted students’ identities as gamers and
created a space where they could bring their own experiences to
the study of world history.
Although 
Civilization III was designed more as entertainment
than as a political statement, many contemporary videogames are
designed with politics in mind. Deus Ex is a popular science ﬁc-
tion game series full of government-sponsored terrorists, powerful
corporations, and duplicitous leaders. The goal behind the origi-
nal game, according to designer Warren Spector, is to give the
player moral choices between trusting organizations and trusting
individuals, and to let the player rethink who is considered an
“enemy” of the state. In 
Deus Ex 2, the player must continuously
decide whether to ally with multiple competing organizations (gov-
ernments, corporations, family loyalties) in a world where every
choice involves moral ambiguity and no decision is ethically
“right.” Personal politics aside, it is clear that games are introduc-
ing players to powerful ideas, some of which may align with school,
some of which may not.
Games provide high graphic, dynamic “worlds in a box,” but
these worlds are not full representations of reality; they are
stripped-down worlds, with limited opportunities for interaction.
A
Civilization III player cannot invent a new religion, and a Deus
Ex 2 player cannot (really) make love to an NPC (nonplayable or
computer character). Thus games focus our attention and mold
our experience of what is important in a world and what is to be
21NOVEMBER 2006

ignored. The game designers’ choices, particularly of what to strip
away from a world, can be read as ideological when considered in
relation to other systems (Starr, 1994). We are only beginning to
understand how these games are interpreted and understood by
their players. Building from work on other media (see Black,
2005; Jenkins, 1992), we can predict that some of this interpre-
tive work occurs through 
interpretive communities where mean-
ings are produced, negotiated, and given legitimacy (Dewey,
1938; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1996).
Knowledge as Performance
To date, there are few studies of learning through game play, al-
though games are rich sites for studying learning, for both prac-
tical and theoretical reasons: Practically, it is important to know
what players are taking away from games such as 
Grand Theft
Auto, Civilization III, and Deus Ex 2, as well as such games’ po-
tential as educational media, given recent interest in games in
e-learning (Aldrich, 2005). Theoretically, games are interesting in
that they are sites of naturally occurring, intrinsically motivated
learning. Early studies of games showed how they use challenge,
curiosity, control, and fantasy (as well as opportunities for social
interaction, competition, and collaborative play) to engage play-
ers (Malone, 1981; Malone & Lepper, 1987). These same design
features have been used to increase learning on pre-post gains
in controlled studies using mathematics software (Cordova &
Lepper, 1996). Such studies suggest the promise of deriving
learning principles from studies of games but are focused on a rel-
atively general level of abstraction and do not account for inno-
vations from the last two generations of games, such as 
interactive
narratives, collaborative problem solving, and game players as pro-
ducers (Squire, 2003).
Digital Games as Microcosms for 21st-Century 
Learning Environments
Today’s generation of games contain a whole new set of features,
making them intriguing suites of learning. Specifically, they are
sites where we can look at learning both as (a) interaction in the
social and material world, where learners participate in open
and closed problem solving; and (b) participation in distributed
social organizations such as self-organizing learning communi-
ties, which are “microcosms for studying the emergence, main-
tenance, transformation, and even collapse of online affinity
groups” (Steinkuehler, in press a). In short, just as previous
generations of psychologists studied expert chess players, Vai
tailors in West Africa, or the navigators of destroyer warships as
examples of “cognition in the wild,” we might study games as
sites of digitally mediated learning (Chase & Simon, 1973;
Hutchins, 1995; Lave & Wenger, 1991). James Paul Gee
(2003, 2004, 2005) argues that videogames are an ideal labo-
ratory for studying learning principles because, as the games 
increase in complexity, game designers embed structures to
help players learn them. Examining these features may pro-
vide insights into the design of other learning environments—
particularly educational software. Virtual worlds, in particular,
might help us understand how to design distributed communi-
ties of practice, or affinity groups stretched across physical space
and linked by telecommunications technologies such as the cell
phone and Internet.
Learning by Doing
A core characteristic of games is that they are organized around
doing. They are uniquely organized for a functional epistemology,
where one learns through doing, through performance (Squire, in
press a). Cognition in digital worlds is thoroughly mediated by
players’ capacities for action: The player’s actions are his or her in-
terface with the world (Clinton, 2004; Young, 2004). Legendary
game designer Shigeru Miyamoto claims to design games around
the verbs that players enact, and these verbs—the running, jump-
ing, diving, punching, kicking, and swinging through enemies
and obstacles—are the building blocks by which players 
become
action heroes, civilization leaders, or L.A. gangsters (Clinton,
2004; Sheff, 1993; Squire, 2005a). It is no coincidence that play-
ers new to a game start by picking up a controller and seeing what
they can do, as ﬁguring out “what the body can 
do in the world
is ﬁguring out who you are in that world” (Clinton, 2004, p. 3).
Of course, game players aren’t doing just anything in these
worlds, they are motivated by challenges set up by designers (or
constructed by the players themselves), and are limited by the
constraints of the game system.
Perceptionof the game world is the other half of the perception/
action system. Games’ graphics are more than pretty pictures;
they are signs that the player must learn to read. As players interact
with the world to ascertain possibilities for action, they develop a
professional vision for the affordances of the world (Gee, 2005;
Goodwin, 1994; Jenkins & Squire, 2004). This vision is shaped by
the strategic signiﬁcance of the world’s signs; a 
Viewtiful Joeplayer,
for example, learns to read the signs of the system in terms of his or
her goals and needs in the space (the ﬁrst being to stay alive), point-
ing to the importance of 
intentionality in cognition and under-
standings (Barab et al., 1999; Squire, in press b). Critically, games
require players to learn to read the game space under what Dewey
might call “the threat of extinction.” The game is quite literally over
for the player who fails to “read” 
Viewtiful Joe.
Through recursive cycles of perceiving and acting, thinking
and doing within the game system, a player begins to adopt a par-
ticular perceptivity of an avatar within the game world; the player
becomes a hybrid version of himself or herself playing as Carl
Johnson in 
San Andreasor the leader of a civilization (Gee, 2005).
Examining games from a socially situated linguistics framework,
Gee (2003) argues that games set up 
projective identities for play-
ers, spaces where they develop unique hybrid characters, which
Gee calls the “Jim Gee playing as Lara Croft” hybrid. The resul-
tant game actions are a synthesis between the character and the af-
fordances—capacities for action of the avatar. Critically, players
learn not just facts or procedures but how to “be” in the world as
the game character, developing the appreciative systems of the
avatar as well. This problem—how to set up transformative iden-
tity spaces—is also a core enterprise for educators, who want to
help students become scientists, doctors, or global activists (Shaf-
fer, Squire, Halverson, & Gee, 2005). Educators in general, and
educational technologists in particular, might beneﬁt by thinking
of videogames as a “research and development lab” for educational
theory and practice.
Participating in Social Worlds
Given the technical sophistication and visual appeal of videogames,
it is tempting to focus on the properties of games-as-objects;
EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER22

however, videogames and their use are mediated by social struc-
tures, such as families, peer groups, affinity groups, or classrooms
(Crawford, 1982; Hakkarainen, 1999; Mitchell, 1985; Salen &
Zimmerman, 2004; Squire, 2002, 2003). Indeed, if we observe
them, most children playing games will be talking, sharing
strategies, downloading FAQs from the Internet, or participat-
ing in online forums (to say nothing about the media—drawings
and stories—that they create about games). Game play, as an ac-
tivity, frequently spans multiple media (Squire & Steinkuehler,
in press). Most gamers describe their play as a social experience,
a way to connect with friends, and rare is the player who truly
games “alone” in any meaningful sense (Kuo, 2004; Johnson,
2005a).
The most intense social learning is found in massively multi-
player games, games where players interact with thousands of
other players in real time over the Internet. Unique to these
games is the 
persistent game world.The game world itself is online
24 hours a day, 7 days a week, across sessions, so that if my char-
acter on 
Star Wars Galaxies owns a house, it is in the world
whether I log in or not. Players’ avatars also persist across sessions,
so that their online avatar becomes another identity that they in-
habit. Psychologist Sherry Turkle (1995) calls this unique state
pseudonymity. Players have a degree of anonymity, but it is medi-
ated through avatars’ histories and roles within the community.
The most noted example of these spaces has been the way that
they allow players to explore new identities, particularly ones
where they inhabit worlds through different genders (Bruckman,
1999; Steinkuehler & Chmiel, 2005). Already, a number of legal
scholars, economists, and sociologists are using them as laborato-
ries to gain fundamental insights about their ﬁelds (Castronova,
2001; Ondrejka, 2004). A growing number of educators are
doing the same (Lemke, 2004; Steinkuehler, in press a).
Once the domain of “computer nerds and hackers,” persistent
online game worlds are now entering the mainstream. Disney’s
ToonTown, a massively multiplayer online role-playing game
(MMORPG) aimed at elementary-school-aged kids, now reaches
more than a hundred thousand subscribers and is rising (Wood-
cock, 2005). In 
ToonTown, players create cartoon avatars and
band together in teams to play pranks on “cogs,” evil cartoon vil-
lains who want to turn ToonTown into a drab office environment
(Mine et al., 2003). World of Warcraft, the current king of
MMORPGs, boasts 6 million global subscribers as of this writing
(Woodcock, 2005). Aimed at a general gaming market, 
World of
Warcraft (somewhat like Everquest before it) is also attracting a
large number of school-age children (Squire, 2005b). The social
pressure of such games, where players literally live second lives in
virtual worlds, has yet to become much of a mainstream issue in
the United States, although China and Korea both have experi-
enced social friction from online gaming (British Broadcasting
Corporation, 2005). In China, legislation has been passed limit-
ing youth access to online games, affecting World of Warcraft(with
over 2 million Chinese subscribers), among others. As global gam-
ing cultures continue to grow, everyday American game players
are beginning to experience the kind of social, economic, and cul-
tural issues (virtual sweatshops, virtual racism) that arise from a
global gaming market where virtual currencies and labor ﬂow
freely across national boundaries (Loftus, 2005; Steinkuehler,
2004a; Thompson, 2005).
As designed cultures, persistent world games function more
like digital nations than like traditional games, making them in-
triguing sites for studying how people reciprocally inhabit and
create culture (Bartle, 1996; Squire & Steinkuehler, in press). At
a minimum, to be an expert player means not just learning a spe-
cialized language—knowing the difference between “kiting” and
“trolling,” “beta vets” and “n00bs,” “twinking” and “nerﬁng”—but
also participating in practices in socially valued ways. “Being” a
competent druid, princess, droid maker, architect, or speculator in
an online world demands learning new geographies, literacies, rule
systems, and ways of expressing oneself (Leander & Lovvorn, 2004;
Steinkuehler, 2003; Squire & Steinkuehler). One productive tract
for inquiry is studying such environments as laboratories for how
societies function (Steinkuehler, 2005). A second may be to exam-
ine the disconnect between the kinds of identities made available
for players in games (e.g., international money trader), and those
available to students in school (passive recipient of knowledge).
In popular media, videogames are frequently blamed for a de-
cline in literacy, intellectual life, and even civic engagement
(Solomon, 2004). Despite the many “literacy” scares based on fear
that games will replace text, Steinkuehler (in press a, in press b)
ﬁnds that participation in Massively Multiplayer Online (MMO)
Discourses 
is itselfa literacy activity. Facility with written language
is central in the community as players use text to negotiate activi-
ties, enact identities, and apprentice others into the community.
Using discourse analysis, Steinkuehler (2004b) describes a deﬁn-
ing feature of apprenticeships as 
joint participation in mutually val-
ued practices,wherein an expert, modeling expert behavior, guides
practice by focusing attention on important environmental fea-
tures and gradually entrusts control to the apprentice. All of these
practices occur within legitimate game play and with all informa-
tion given just-in-time. As Steinkuehler emphasizes, players are
“socialize[d] into certain ways of being and understanding the vir-
tual world, ways that are tied to particular values” (pp. 6–7). In
short, participation in MMOs constitutes participation in social
practices with real consequences for its members.
To date, there are still relatively few studies of what players do
in these environments or what the consequences are for participa-
tion outside the game context. Participation in online gaming—
much like high-end participation in any part of today’s popular
culture (i.e., Pokemon, fan ﬁction), demands a range of (primar-
ily written) social practices, eliciting an enormous amount of
reading, writing, research, analysis, and argumentation (Black,
2005; Jenkins, in press; Johnson, 2005a; Leander & Lovvorn, 2004;
Steinkuehler, 2004a; Steinkuehler, Black, & Clinton, 2005).
Typical game practices—including mentoring, writing FAQs,
participating in message boards, developing ﬁctional back-stories,
and creating mathematical models of game systems are quite
similar to many practices valued in school (Steinkuehler &
Chmiel, 2006). As such, they could be 
leading activities, activi-
ties that orient learners to academically valued practices and their
underlying purposes, both of which are critical for academic suc-
cess (Brown & Cole, 2002). Given contemporary theories of
transfer as preparation for future learning, whereby “good learn-
ing” is that which prepares one for future success, games and
other forms of popular culture could be educationally impor-
tant, raising important equity issues about who has access to
such communities (Johnson, 2005a, 2005b). Outside school, in
23NOVEMBER 2006

games such as Star Wars Galaxies, students have opportunities to
become architects, shopkeepers, designers, warriors, Jedi, ﬁnancial
traders, or dancers, and can make real world wages while playing
a game. Will we provide students similarly diverse opportunities
for experience in schools?
Games as Designed Experience
Given the complexity of games such as Sim City and the ability of
gaming technologies to support interaction among thousands of
users in photorealistic worlds and in real time, it is no wonder that
games are attracting attention as a medium for learning (Aldrich,
2005; Games-to-Teach Team, 2003). On the one hand, given that
nearly every other medium has been used for learning, it seems self-
evident that games eventually will become a part of our educational
system. On the other hand, games embody values (collaborative
learning, learning through failure, personalized learning) that are
at odds with the grammar of formal schooling (Beck & Wade,
2004). The history of educational media suggests that media that
do not conform to the values of the broader system will not be
taken up (Cuban, 1986). Although drill and practice games and
relatively simple simulation activities have long been used in for-
mal learning environments, today’s contemporary games, which
frequently last for 40 hours or more, operate under different as-
sumptions (see Table 1). The game provides a set of experiences,
with the assumption being that learners are active constructors of
meaning with their own drives, goals, and motivations. Most good
games afford multiple trajectories of participation and meaning
making. Content is delivered just-in-time and on demand to solve
EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER24
Table 1
Contrasting Game Types
Aspects Exogenous Games a Endogenous Gamesb
Learner is . . .
Knowledge is . . .
Learning is . . .
Instruction is . . .
Social model is . . .
Pre-knowledge is . . .
Identity is . . .
Context is . . .
aGames in which the context is extrinsic to the game play.
bGames in which the context and game play are inextricably linked. (These terms are from Rieber, 1996).
An empty receptacle. An example is Math Blaster,
where the learner is “motivated” to learn a 
prescribed set of skills and facts.
Knowledge of discrete facts. The facts are “true”
by authority (generally the authority of the
game designer).
Memorizing. Learners reproduce a set of prescribed
facts, such as mathematics tables.
Transmission. The goal of a drill and practice
game is to transmit information effectively and
to “train” a set of desired responses.
“Claustrophobic.” Players are expected to solve
problems alone; using outside resources is 
generally “cheating.”
Set of facts, knowledge, and skills to be assessed
for proper pacing. In 
Math Blaster, players’ 
self-efficacy in mathematics is not addressed.
Something to be cajoled. If players are not “moti-
vated” to do math, the game developer’s job is
to create an “exciting” context for the learner.
A motivational wrapper. The context in Math
Blaster is something to make learning more
palatable.
An active, sense-making, social organism. An 
example is Grand Theft Auto, where the learner
brings existing identities and experiences that
color interpretations of the game experience.
Tool set used to solve problems. The right answer
in Civilization is that which is efficacious for
solving problems in the game world.
Doing, experimenting, discovering for the pur-
poses of action in the world. Players learn in
role-playing games for the purposes of acting
within an identity.
Making meaning/construction, discovery, social
negotiation process. Instruction in 
Super-
charged! involves creating a set of well-
designed experiences that elicit identities and
encourage learners to confront existing beliefs,
perform skills in context, and reﬂect on their
understandings.
Fundamentally group oriented. Games are 
designed to be played collectively, in affinity
groups, and distributed across multiple media.
They are designed with complexity to spawn
affinity groups and communities that support
game play.
Knowledge to be leveraged, played upon. 
Pre-knowledge is expected to color perception,
ideas, and strategies. In 
Environmental Detec-
tives, challenges are structured so that players
become increasingly competent and learn to
see the value of mathematics.
Something to be recruited, managed, built over
time. In 
Environmental Detectives, learners
develop identities as scientists.
The “content” of the experience. In Civilization,
the geographical-materialist game model is the
argument that situates activity and drives
learning.

25NOVEMBER 2006
problems. An emerging model of games suggests that they excel by
providing learners with situated experiences of activities, whereby
they develop new ways of thinking, knowing, and being in worlds
(Shaffer, Squire, Halverson, & Gee, 2005).
Entertainment Games Used for Learning
Many in the current generation of students ﬁrst experience history,
urban planning, or business not through school, television, or
movies but through videogames. The 
Sim City, Civilization,and
various Tycoon simulation games are now about 15 years old, and
for about as long, educators have hypothesized that they could be
effective learning tools (e.g. Berson, 1996; Hope, 1996; Kolson,
1996; Prensky, 2001; Teague & Teague, 1995). Although teach-
ers around the country use or have used 
Sim City, Civilization,and
Rollercoaster Tycoon in urban planning, world history, or physics
classes, there has been little academic study of how learning occurs
through such programs or how conceptions of history or urban
planning change as they are represented through digital media.
Emerging studies of educators using videogames suggest that
the videogames are much more complex than earlier game-
based media. For example, turning 
Civilization III into a colo-
nial simulation affected the kinds of questions students asked
as well as the observations and interpretations they made about
history. For the most part, students interpreted their game events
in terms of preexisting notions of colonization or geography but
expanded and modiﬁed their understandings of colonization in the
process of playing. As players managed natural resources, they
learned not only where oil, coal, or sugar cane is located but how
these resources affect the growth of civilizations. Ross Dunn
(2000) called this approach to world history the “patterns of
change” model, wherein world history consists of patterns of
human activity across broad time-scales, as opposed to the tradi-
tional national or “Western civilization” approach.
Students used these game experiences to think about why civ-
ilizations grow, ﬂourish, and fade, and how wars, revolutions, and
civilizations evolve as the products of interweaving geographical,
social, economic, and political forces. Many students who rejected
traditional school-based curricula as “heritage” or cultural myths
of “Western progress” found that 
Civilization IIIallowed them to
“replay history” and learn history through geographical material-
ist lenses rather than the ideology of Western progress. In one dis-
cussion (reported in Squire & Barab, 2004), students explain
what they learned through playing 
Civilization III:
Tony: Luxuries buys you money and money buys you everything.
The right location gives you luxuries gives you income more
income gives you technology which affects your politics. It all
connects.
Kent: Geography affects your diplomacy because it gets you more 
resources and affects how they treat you.
Tony: Geography can affect the growth of your civilization.
Dwayne: It affects your war.
As students interacted with the game and discussed it in class, they
began to understand its ideological bias and at times, took it up as
a framework for explaining world history. But simulation games
also remediate games in ways that educators ought to consider
more deeply. When asked to describe what he learned from this
unit, Tony commented, “I learned that no matter how it plays out,
history plays by the same set of rules.”
Games as New Educational Media
If we take McLuhan’s “the medium is the message” seriously, then
it is interesting to think about how representing ideas through
games remediates how we experience those phenomena (Holland,
Jenkins, & Squire, 2003). Conceptualizing domains through the
medium of games means taking content and rethinking it in
terms of designed experience, as represented through challenges,
goals, and practices (Games-to-Teach Team, 2003). Such an ap-
proach might allow educators to go beyond traditional notions of
education as “exposure to content” and reimagine it, along pro-
gressive lines, as enrichment of experience (Dewey, 1938; Gee,
2004). Contemporary games function in ways very different from
traditional “educational” games; whereas traditional educational
games use context as a motivational wrapper for the game experi-
ence, contemporary games literally put players 
inside game sys-
tems. Expanding on Rieber’s (1996) distinction between
endogenous and exogenous games, we can contrast games where
the context 
is the game play with games where the context is ir-
relevant to game play (see Table 1).
As an example of what a game-based pedagogy might look
like, consider the physics game Supercharged! that was devel-
oped at MIT to help students learn basic concepts in electro-
statics (Jenkins, Squire, & Tan, 2004). Studies of physicists in
labs show that, in order to understand physics phenomena, the
physicists frequently put themselves 
into problem spaces. Ochs,
Gonzales, and Jacoby (1996) write that “scientists express their
subjective involvement . . . by taking the perspective of (and
empathizing with) some object being analyzed and by involv-
ing themselves in graphic (re)enactment of physical events.”
Electrostatics, a foundational area in physics, is particularly diffi-
cult for students to grasp because—although they may use elec-
tricity or even play around with magnets—they have no 
direct
experience of charged particles interacting or moving through
magnetic fields. Given that one of the affordances of games is
the way that they place players within systems, the designers of
Supercharged! hoped to give students the experience of entering
the arena of physics problems just as physicists do, an instruc-
tional strategy common to the qualitative physics approach
(diSessa, 1998; Forbus, 1997; Jenkins, Squire, & Tan).
In 
Supercharged!, players enter a world of electrostatic charges
and must lead a group of virtual classmates through levels that
are matched to classic physics thought experiments. Building
on diSessa’s notion of intuitive physics, game levels are designed
to confront players’ understandings of physics phenomena and
to help them develop more robust intuitions of electrostatic
physics through a playful rethinking of traditional physics cur-
ricula. Figure 2, for example, shows a level designed to build
players’ intuitions about electrostatic forces and distance; players,
attempting to go straight through the level and toward the goal
frequently hypothesize that the forces generated from each charge
will negate one another or create a balance of forces. In reality, be-
cause the strength of a force diminishes over distance by the
square of the distance (Coulomb’s Law, 
F = kqQ/r2), the player
quickly moves toward the charge that is closest to his or her posi-
tion (the point of view of the camera). As players confront a vari-
ety of levels designed to elucidate this mathematical principle,
they begin to intuit how electrostatic forces interact.

In a study of Supercharged!in a middle school classroom, Barnett,
Squire, Higgenbotham, and Grant (2004) found that students
who participated in a unit based on playing 
Supercharged! out-
performed students in learning physics through hands-on experi-
ments, demonstrations, and viewing simulations. In an interview
following the game, one student described how he learned the
meaning of field lines (a scientific visualization technique) in
the game. “The electric goes from the positive charge to the neg-
ative charge like this [drawing a curved line from a positive charge
to a negative charge]. I know this because this is what it looked like
in the game. . . .” The most dramatic results, in fact, came from
students who were unsuccessful in school, suggesting that game-
based formats may make complex science thinking accessible to a
broader range of students.
Supercharged!, originally designed to help MIT students in
physics, does not include many other aspects of science learning
that would be critical for less science-minded populations, such as
coming to see, think, act, and be in the world as a physicist might—
coming to inhabit the identity of a physicist. One can imagine
games that provide students with experiences as scientists, envi-
ronmental engineers, or doctors, much as role-playing games offer
experiences as government agents, urban gang members, or leaders
of civilizations. However, videogames that are designed to provide
experiences of inhabiting identities within ideological worlds are
much more complex to make. They must provide objects, charac-
ters, and interactions that are believable. They need to immerse
players so that they experience the world as scientists, replete with
perceptions, actions, conversations, and modes of expression where
they participate in social practice as scientists. The possibility of cre-
ating such games in fully digitized media is now visible on the hori-
zon; with appropriate funding it can be done (Holland, Jenkins, &
Squire, 2003; Shaffer, Squire, Halverson, & Gee, 2005).
Such models are being prototyped with emerging technologies
such as augmented reality simulation games (Klopfer & Squire,
in press). Klopfer and colleagues have been using augmented re-
ality simulations, simulations that span real and virtual worlds,
to incorporate the world around them into gameboards. Aug-
mented reality simulations attempt to place students in roles as
investigators, scientists, or activists, leveraging players’ emotional
connections to physical locations. Players begin with a challenge,
such as investigating a friend’s death that might be tied to envi-
ronmental poisoning. Using handheld technologies, players take
readings from simulated stations to measure toxins (such as
trichloroethene ﬂowing through groundwater) or to interview vir-
tual characters. Working in teams, players must identify problems,
pose data-gathering strategies, draw conclusions, and reframe their
hypotheses as they work.
A core feature underlying such simulations is that they give
students the experience of being competent, independently
thinking problem solvers, enabling them to develop identities in
relation to an established community of practice. Thus these
augmented reality simulation games share much in common
with professional practice simulations, where students learn as
doctors, architects, or journalists (Shaffer, 2004). Shaffer argues
that participating in such simulations, particularly when built on
ethnographies of practice, allows students to develop 
epistemic
frames, or coherent ways of thinking that they can bring to new
situations. Students with experience in “being” environmental
engineers gain a way of thinking that they can draw from in
other academic areas. Thus it is important that role-playing
games such as 
Environmental Detectivesgive players access to ways
of thinking and being in the world, as opposed to just asking them
to memorize facts.
Role-playing games such as Environmental Detectives try to
draw on the engaging features of Deus Ex, Grand Theft Auto, or
Civilization by providing players with designed experiences in a
world constructed by a particular set of rules where they can learn
through performing a certain kind of role, a certain way of being
in the world. Hopefully, the ideological nature of such pedago -
gies is clear; educators using game-based pedagogies are design-
ing experiences for students that privilege certain worldviews and
ways of being in the world over others. Therefore, serious con-
sideration needs to be given to what kinds of experiences our stu-
dents ought to have. At a minimum, such experiences, which are
based on participation in ideological systems and which draw on
learning as performance, include a hidden curriculum of active
participation in problem solving, as opposed to docile reception
of school-sanctioned content (Apple, 1992; Gee, 2004; Squire,
in press a).
Conclusions
Although digital games have largely been ignored by educational
researchers, they are a powerful new medium with potential im-
plications for schooling. In videogames, knowing is at its essence
a kind of performance, as learners learn by doing, but within pow-
erful constraints instantiated through software and social systems.
The focus is on experience that enables students to develop situ-
ated understandings, to learn through failure, and to develop iden-
tities as expert problem solvers (Gee, 2003; Squire, in press a). In
this article I argue that educators might proﬁt by studying these
designed experiences,experiences resulting from the intersection of
design constraints and players’ intentions.
EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER26
FIGURE 2. Screen shot from Supercharged! The player’s position
is represented by the camera position. The black hole is the goal
and the numbers indicate the distance to the goal. The stars indi-
cate negative electric charges; the lines are ﬁeld lines showing the
force of the charge. Copyright 2006 by Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Reproduced with permission.

Possibly more important, videogame cultures represent tacit as-
sumptions about knowledge, learning, expertise, and formal insti-
tutions that may be at odds with those of schools (Beck & Wade,
2004; Gee, 2004; Lankshear & Knobel, 2003). Videogames epit-
omize a potentially destabilizing wave of technologies whereby stu-
dents can access information and social networks at any time,
anywhere. As students confront more sophisticated digital worlds
outside school, educators are challenged to react: Do we present
and expect students to pursue print-based literacies, ignoring the
visual culture and computer mediated worlds they inhabit out of
school? And, perhaps most important, what identities do we make
available to students in school? Our schools ask students to learn
all at the same rate, in the same way, and at the same time; but
games make a variety of learning paths available. Schools ask stu-
dents to inhabit a limited and very particular set of identities as re-
cipients of ideas and agendas prescribed for them; in contrast,
games require players to be active participants in co-constructing
their worlds and identities with designers. Games and their associ-
ated technologies may not render schools obsolete, but the educa-
tional community should pay attention to the kinds of learning
that occur through games and digital worlds.
As videogames mature as a medium, the question becomes not
whether they will be used for learning but for whom and in what
contexts. If games have the dramatic potential to immerse play-
ers in complex systems, allowing them to learn the points of view
of those systems and perhaps even develop identities within the
systems, it is not surprising that the military, “advergaming” ad-
vertisers, and private groups have begun using games to support
their agendas (Squire, 2005b). Perhaps it is also not surprising
that games have been taken up most stridently in the military,
which is largely charged with training those who have fallen
through the cracks of the American educational system. As the
military, private businesses, and nonproﬁt groups use games to
spread their ideologies, it is crucial that educators with an in-
terest in democracy and K–12 education examine the medium’s
potential to spread their inﬂuence. With the U.S. Navy and Air
Force planning similar games, and middle-class parents playing
Pokemon or Civilization with their children, we need to ask, What
will happen to families that cannot afford such technologies? And
what will become of formal schools if they are the last to recog -
nize the potential of this powerful medium?
REFERENCES
Aldrich, C. (2005). Learning by doing: A comprehensive guide to simula-
tions, computer games, and pedagogy in e-learning and other educational
experiences. New York: Wiley.
Apple, M. W. (1992). Ideology and curriculum. New York: Routledge.
Barab, S. A., Cherkes-Julkowski, M., Swenson, R., Garrett., S., Shaw,
R. E., & Young, M. (1999). Principles of self-organization: Ecologiz-
ing the learner-facilitator system. Journal of the Learning Sciences,
8(3–4), 349–390.
Barnett, M., Squire, K., Higgenbotham, T., & Grant, J. (2004). Elec-
tromagnetism supercharged! In Y. Kafai, W. Sandoval, N. Enyedy, 
A. Dixon, & F. Herrera (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2004 International
Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 513–520). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bartle, R. (1996). Hearts, clubs, diamonds, spades: Players who suit
MUDs. Journal of MUD Research, 1(1). Retrieved November 3, 2003,
from http://www.mud.co.uk/richard/hcds.htm
Beck, J., & Wade, (2004). Got game: How the gamer generation is re-
shaping business forever. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School
Press.
Berson, M. J. (1996). Effectiveness of computer technology in the social
studies: A review of the literature. Journal of Research on Computing in
Education, 28(4), 486–499.
Black, R. W. (2005). Access and affiliation: The literacy and composi-
tion practices of English language learners in an online fanﬁction com-
munity. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 49(2), 118–128.
British Broadcasting Corporation. (2005, August 25). China imposes
online gaming curbs. BBC News Online. Retrieved January 26, 2006,
from http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/4183340.stm
Brown K., & Cole, M. (2002). Cultural historical activity theory and
the expansion of opportunities for learning after school. La Jolla, CA:
Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition, San Diego State
University. Retrieved November 16, 2006, from http://lchc.ucsd.
edu/People/MCole/browncole.html
Bruckman, A. S. (1999). Gender swapping on the Internet. In V. J. Vitanza
(Ed.), CyberReader (2nd ed., pp. 418–423). Needham Heights, MA:
Allyn & Bacon.
Casti, J. L. (1997). Would-be worlds: How simulation is changing the fron-
tiers of science. New York: Wiley.
Castronova, E. (2001). Virtual worlds: A ﬁrst-hand account of market and
society on the cyberian frontier(CESifo Working Paper Series No. 618).
Fullerton, CA: Center for Economic Studies and Institute for Eco-
nomic Research, California State University. Retrieved November 16,
2006, from 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=294828
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). The mind’s eye in chess. In
W. G. Chase (Ed.), Visual information processing(pp. 215–281). New
York: Academic Press.
Church, D. (2000, March). Abdicating authorship. Talk presented at the
annual meeting of the Game Developer’s Conference, San Jose, CA.
Clinton, K. A. (2004, April). Embodiment in digital worlds: What being
a videogame player has to teach us about learning.Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association,
San Diego.
Cordova, D. I., & Lepper, M. R. (1996). Intrinsic motivation and the
process of learning: Beneﬁcial effects of contextualization, personal-
ization, and choice. 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 715–730.
Crawford, C. (1982). The art of computer game design. Vancouver, WA:
Washington State University. Available at http://www.vancouver.wsu.
edu/fac/peabody/game-book/Coverpage.html
Cuban, L. (1986). Teachers and machines. New York: Teacher’s College
Press.
Dewey, J. (1938). Experience and education. New York: Collier Books.
Diamond, J. (1999). Guns, germs, and steel: The fates of human societies.
New York: Norton.
diSessa, A. (1998). Changing minds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dunn, R. E., (2000). Constructing world history in the classroom? In
P. N. Stearns, P. Seixas, & S. Wineburg (Eds.), Knowing teaching and
learning history. New York: New York University Press.
Erwin, S. (2005, December). Games are gaining ground, but how far
can they go? National Defense Magazine. Available at http://www.
nationaldefensemagazine.org/issues/2005/dec1/games_are.htm
Forbus, K. (1997). Using qualitative physics to create articulate educa-
tional software. IEEE Expert (May/June), 32–41.
Friedman, T. (1999). Civilization and its discontents: Simulation, subjec-
tivity, and space. In G. Smith (Ed.), Discovering discs: Transforming
space and place on CD-ROM.New York: New York University Press.
Funk, J. B., Hagen, J. D., & Schimming, J. L. (1999). Children and elec-
tronic games: A comparison of parent and child perceptions of chil-
dren’s habits and preferences in a United States sample. Psychological
Reports, 85, 883–888.
27NOVEMBER 2006

Games-to-Teach Team. (2003). Design principles of next-generation
digital gaming for education. Educational Technology, 43(5), 17–33.
Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and
literacy. New York: Palgrave/St. Martin’s.
Gee, J. P. (2004). Language, learning, and gaming: A critique of traditional
schooling. New York: Routledge.
Gee, J. P. (2005). Why video games are good for your soul: Pleasure and
learning. Melbourne, Australia: Common Ground.
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist,
96(3), 606–633.
Hakkarainen, P. (1999). Play and motivation. In Y. Engström, R. 
Miettinen, & R.-L. Punamäki (Eds.), Aspects of activity theory.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Holland, W., Jenkins, H., & Squire, K. (2003). Theory by design. In 
B. Perron & M. Wolf (Eds.), Video game theory.New York: Routledge.
Hope, W. C. (1996). It’s time to transform social studies teaching.
Social Studies, 87 (4), 149–151.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild.Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Interactive Digital Software Association v. St. Louis County, 200 F.
Supp. 2d 1126 (E.D. Mo. 2002).
Interactive Digital Software Association v. St. Louis County, No. 02-
3010 (June 3, 2003).
Jenkins, H. (1992). Textual poachers. New York: Routledge.
Jenkins, H. (in press). Convergence cultures. New York: New York Uni-
versity Press.
Jenkins, H., & Squire, K. D. (2004). Harnessing the power of games in
education. Insight, 3(1), 5–33.
Jenkins, H., Squire, K., & Tan, P. (2004). You can’t bring that game to
school! Designing Supercharged! In B. Laurel (Ed.), Design Research
(pp. 244–252). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Johnson, S. (2005a). Why everything bad is good for you. New York:
Riverhead.
Johnson, S. (2005b). Your brain on video games: Could they actually be
good for you? Discover, 26(7). Retrieved November 17, 2006, from
http://www.discover.com/issues/jul-05/features/brain-on-video-games/
Klopfer, E., & Squire, K. (in press). Environmental detectives: The devel-
opment of an augmented reality platform for environmental simulations.
Educational Research Technology & Development.
Kolson, K. (1996, March). The politics of Sim City. Political Science and
Politics, 29(1), 43–46.
Kreimeier, B. (2000, April 13). Puzzled at GDC 2000: A peek into puz-
zle design. Gamasutra. Retrieved October 31, 2006, from http://www.
gamasutra.com/features/20000413/kreimeier_01.htm
Kuo, J. (2004, May). Online video games in mental health. Paper pre-
sented at the annual meeting of the American Psychiatry Association,
New York.
Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (2003). 
New literacies. London: Open
University Press.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral
participation. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Leander, K. M., & Lovvorn, J. (2004, April). Literacy networks: Fol-
lowing the circulation of texts and identities in the school-related and
computer gaming-related literacies of one youth.
Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association,
San Diego.
LeBlanc, M. (2005). Tools for creating dramatic game dynamics. In 
K. Salen & E. Zimmerman (Eds.), The game design reader: A rules of
play anthology (pp. 438–459). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lemke, J. (2004). Why study digital gameworlds? Notes toward a basic re-
search agenda for learning technologies. Retrieved December 11, 2004,
from http://www-personal.umich.edu/∼jaylemke/games.htm
Li, Z. (2004). The potential of America’s Army as civilian public sphere.
Unpublished master’s thesis. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Loftus, T. (2005, February 7). Virtual worlds wind up in real world’s
courts: Online games intended as escape face legal headaches.
MSNBC.com. Retrieved November 11, 2006, from http://www.
msnbc.msn.com/id/6870901/
Malone, T. W. (1981). Toward a theory of intrinsically motivating in-
struction. Cognitive Science, 5(4), 333–369.
Malone, T. W., & Lepper, M. R. (1987). Making learning fun: A taxon-
omy of intrinsic motivations for learning. In R. E. Snow & M. J. Farr
(Eds.), Aptitude, learning and instruction: Vol. 3. Conative and affective
process analysis(pp. 223–253). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Manning, P. (2003). Navigating world history: Historians create a global
past. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
McFarlane, A., Sparrowhawk, A., & Heald, Y. (2002). Report on the
educational use of games: An exploration by TEEM of the contribu-
tion which games can make to the education process. Cambridge, UK: 
Futurelab. Retrieved June 29, 2005, from www.teem.org.uk/publications/
teem_gamesined_full.pdf
Mine, M. R., Shochet, J., & Hughston, R. (2003). Building a massively
multiplayer game for the million: Disney’s Toontown Online. Com-
puters in Entertainment, 1(1), 15.
Mitchell, E. (1985). The dynamics of family interaction around home
video games [Special issue: Personal computers and the family].
Marriage and Family Review 8 (1–2), 121–135.
Moulder, S. (2004, March). Fun with a purpose.Presentation at the Serious
Games Summit, San Jose, CA.
Murray, J. H. (1997). Hamlet on the holodeck: The future of narrative in
cyberspace. New York: Free Press.
Ochs, E., Gonzales, P., & Jacoby, S. (1996). When I come down I’m in
a domain state: Talk, gesture, and graphic representation in the inter-
pretive activity of physicists. In E. Ochs, E. Schegloff, & S. Thompson
(Eds.), 
Interaction and grammar (pp. 328–369). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Ondrejka, C. R. (2004). Living on the edge: Digital worlds which embrace
the real world.Social Science Research Network. Retrieved on June 5,
2006, from http://ssrn.com/abstract=555661
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital game-based learning.New York: McGraw Hill.
Provenzo, E. F. (1991). Video kids: Making sense of Nintendo. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Reiber, L. (1996). Seriously considering play: Designing interactive
learning environments based on the blending of microworlds, simu-
lations, and games. Education and Technology Research & Development,
44, 42–58.
Robison, A. (2004, April). The “internal design grammar” of video games.
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational
Research Association, San Diego, CA.
Salen, K., & Zimmerman, E. (2004). The rules of play.Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1996). Computer support for knowledge-
building communities. In T. Koschmann (Ed.), CSCL: Theory and
practice of an emerging paradigm.Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Shaffer, D. W. (2004). Pedagogical praxis: The professions as models for
post-industrial education. Teachers College Record, 106(7), 1401–1421.
Shaffer, D. W., Squire, K. D., Halverson, R., & Gee J.P. (2005). Video
games and the future of learning. Phi Delta Kappan, 87(2), 104–111.
Sheff, D. (1993). Game over: How Nintendo zapped an American in-
dustry, captured your dollars and enslaved your children. New York:
Random House.
Solomon, A. (2004, July 10). The closing of the American book. New
York Times.Retrieved October 2, 2004, from http://www.nytimes.com
Squire, K. D. (2002). Cultural framing of computer/video games.
Game Studies: The International Journal of Computer Game Research,
1(2). Retrieved November 3, 2003, from http://www.gamestudies.
org/0102/squire/
EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER28

29NOVEMBER 2006
Squire, K. D. (2003). Video games in education. International Journal
of Intelligent Games & Simulation, 2(1). Retrieved November 1, 2003,
from http://www.scit.wlv.ac.uk/∼cm1822/ijkurt.pdf
Squire, K. D. (2004). Replaying history. Unpublished dissertation, Indi-
ana University, Bloomington.
Squire, K. D. (2005a). Educating the ﬁghter. On the Horizon, 13 (2),
75–88.
Squire, K. D. (2005b). Toward a theory of games literacy. Telemedium,
52(1–2), 9–15.
Squire, K. D. (in press a). Civilization III as a world history sandbox. In
M. Bittanti (Eds.), Civilization and its discontents: Virtual history: Real
fantasies. Milan, Italy: Ludilogica Press.
Squire, K. D. (in press b). Educating the ﬁghter. On the Horizon.
Squire, K. D., & Barab, S. A. (2004). Replaying history. In Y. Kafai, W.
Sandoval, N. Enyedy, A. Dixon, & F. Herrera (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 2004 International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp.
505–512). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Squire, K. D., & Steinkuehler, C. A. (in press). The genesis of “Cyber-
Culture”: The case of Star Wars Galaxies. In D. Gibbs & L. Krause
(Eds.), 
Cyberlines: Languages and cultures of the Internet(2nd ed.). Al-
bert Park, Australia: James Nicholas Publishers.
Starr, P. (1994). Seductions of sim. The American Prospect, 5(17). Retrieved
October 31, 2006, from http://www.prospect.org/print/V5/17/starr-p.html
Steinkuehler, C. A. (2003, March). Videogaming as participation in a
Discourse. Paper presented at the annual conference of the American
Association for Applied Linguistics (AAAL), Arlington, VA.
Steinkuehler, C. A. (2004a, October). Emergent play. Paper presented at
the State of Play Conference, New York University Law School, New
York. Retrieved June 29, 2005, from https://mywebspace.wisc.edu/
steinkuehler/web/papers/SteinkuehlerSoP2004.pdf
Steinkuehler, C. A. (2004b, April). The literacy practices of massively
multiplayer online gaming. Paper presented at the 2004 annual meet-
ing of the American Educational Research Association, San Diego, CA.
Steinkuehler, C.A. (in press a). Learning in massively multiplayer online
games. Mind, Culture, and Activity.
Steinkuehler, C. A. (in press b). The new third place: Massively multi -
player online gaming in American youth culture. Tidskrift Journal of
Research in Education.
Steinkuehler, C. A., Black, R. W., & Clinton, K. A. (2005) Researching
literacy as tool, place, and way of being. Reading Research Quarterly,
40(1), 7–12.
Steinkuehler, C. A., & Chmiel, M. (2005, July). Gendered talk in mas-
sively multiplayer online games. Paper presented at the 14th World
Congress of Applied Linguistics, Madison, WI.
Steinkuehler, C. A., & Chmiel, M. (2006, June). Fostering scientific
habits of mind in the context of online play. Paper presented at the
7th International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Blooming-
ton, IN.
Teague, M., & Teague, G. (1995). 
Learning and leading with technology,
23(1), 20–22.
Thompson, T. (2005, March 13). They play games for 10 hours—and
earn £2.80 in a “virtual sweatshop.” The Observer. Retrieved January
26, 2006, from http://observer.guardian.co.uk/international/story/0,6903,
1436411,00.html
Turkle, S. (1995). Life on the screen: Identity in the age of the Internet.
New York: Touchstone.
Turkle, S. (2003). From powerful ideas to PowerPoint. Convergence: The
Journal of Research into New Media Technologies, 9(2), 19–28.
Williams, D. (2003). The video game lightning rod. Information, Com-
munication & Society, 6(4), 523–550.
Wolfram, S. (2002). A new kind of science. Champaign, IL: Wolfram
Media.
Woodcock, B. S. (2005). An analysis of MMOG subscription growth—
Version 10.0.Retrieved October 2, 2005, from http://pw1.netcom.com.
nyud.net:8090/∼sirbruce/Subscriptions.html
Young, M. (2004, July). Games in education: Learning in formal and in-
formal ways from role playing and arcade video games. Paper presented
at the 2004 International Conference of Education and Information
Systems Conference, Orlando, FL.
AUTHOR
KURT SQUIREis an Assistant Professor of Educational Communications
and Technology, Department of Curriculum and Instruction, University
of Wisconsin, 554b TEB, 225 N. Mills Street, Madison, WI 53706; 
kdsquire@education.wisc.edu.His areas of special interest include situated
learning theory, videogames, and videogame culture, with research focus-
ing on the design of game-based learning environments.
Manuscript received December 13, 2004
Revisions received August 3, 2005, and January 30, 2006
Accepted May 13, 2006
