College & Undergraduate Libraries
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/wcul20
Dungeons & Dewey decimals: A D&D-ﬆyle TTRPG adventure module for outreach and library skills
Alex P. Watson, Elizabeth Batte, Brian W. Young & Shelby A. Watson
To cite this article: Alex P. Watson, Elizabeth Batte, Brian W. Young & Shelby A. Watson (2024) Dungeons & Dewey decimals: A D&D-style TTRPG adventure module for outreach and library skills, College & Undergraduate Libraries, 31:3-4, 113-129, DOI: 10.1080/10691316.2024.2425089 To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/10691316.2024.2425089
Published online: 18 Nov 2024. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 260 View related articles View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=wcul20

College & Undergraduate Libraries 2024, VOL. 31, NOS. 3–4, 113–129 https://doi.org/10.1080/10691316.2024.2425089

Dungeons & Dewey decimals: A D&D-style TTRPG adventure module for outreach and library skills
Alex P. Watsona , Elizabeth Batteb, Brian W. Youngc and Shelby A. Watsond
aUM Libraries Research & Instruction, University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi, USA; bUM Library Public Services, University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi, USA; cUM Libraries Scholar Support and Data Services, University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi, USA; dUM Libraries IDEALab, Sarah Katherine Glass, IDEAlab, University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi, USA

ABSTRACT
This article details the proof-of-concept development and creation of a custom one-shot adventure module for a tabletop role-playing game (TTRPG) set in a fantasy version of the University of Mississippi’s J.D. Williams Library complete with detailed map, character sheets, and 3D-printed game pieces. Despite some initial difficulties, this project explored the educational potential of custom TTRPG content within a library context, further implying that similar initiatives could enhance library outreach services and foster creativity and learning in libraries.

ARTICLE HISTORY Received 27 August 2024 Revised 25 October 2024 Accepted 30 October 2024
KEYWORDS Academic libraries; Dungeons & Dragons (D&D); Educational gamification; library outreach; makerspaces; tabletop role-playing games (TTRPG)

Introduction
Many libraries contain games, and many librarians are gamers; this is as true for traditional paper-based tabletop games as it is for video games. In this spirit, a group of tabletop gamers working at the University of Mississippi Libraries set out to develop a unique, custom one-shot adventure set within a fantasy version of the University of Mississippi’s J.D. Williams Library. By creating a fantasy version of the real layout of the library, complete with maps, enemies, treasure, and quests, the project aimed to explore the possible scholarly and pedagogical uses of such bespoke tabletop role-playing game (TTRPG) elements in a library setting. Through a lengthy process of brainstorming and collaboration, and despite problems with scheduling and playtesting, the team was ultimately able to create a comprehensive one-shot adventure module, which included sample character sheets, a detailed map with each room representing both a library space and well-known TTRPG tropes, a

CONTACT Alex P. Watson apwatson@olemiss.edu UM Libraries Research & Instruction, University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi, USA. This article has been corrected with minor changes. These changes do not impact the academic content of the article.
© 2024 The Author(s). Published with license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

114

A. P. WATSON ET AL.

library-related quest, and other accouterments, to serve as a proof of concept.

Background
The University of Mississippi has, like many college campuses, a long history of students playing TTRPGs. Currently, there is an official student organization known as the Ole Miss Gamers Association (OMGA) which meet regularly throughout the semester to play TTRPGs and to also provide introductory educational sessions for newcomers. While TTRPGs as a concept are varied and diverse, the definition proffered by Cason Snow (2008) is useful for disambiguating them from similar computer role-playing games and/or boardgames:
[…] a set of rules of varying complexity where a group of people (the players) assume roles (characters, the protagonists) and cooperatively seek to overcome obstacles and resolve conflicts placed before them by the game master (the GM). The action in the game is narrated by both the players (for their characters) and the GM (for all other inhabitants) for the purpose of collaboratively crafting a kind of ongoing narrative. (Snow 2008, p. 63)
The archetypal TTRPG is Dungeons & Dragons (D&D). It was created in the 1970s and has been owned since 1997 by now-Hasbro subsidiary Wizards of the Coast, although many other similar or broadly compatible TTRPGs, such as Paizo’s Pathfinder, exist. Many people use “D&D” as a generic shorthand for all TTRPGs regardless of the actual title or rules in play.
Many of the faculty and staff at the University of Mississippi Libraries (J.D. Williams Library) are current or former TTRPG players, using either the D&D 5th edition or the Pathfinder 1st edition ruleset. This, and an observation that students would often get lost in the library building (making it a “dungeon”) while needing assistance (or on “quests”) sparked an idea. Could the library, itself, be a D&D-style adventure, and could that adventure be put toward any sort of scholarly use?
While the underlying rulesets for TTRPGs are constant, the scenarios toward which they are applied are not, and GMs will often acquire scenarios – or “modules” – for their players. These modules often have a self-contained story, pre-made maps, pre-generated non-player characters (NPCs), enemy encounters, and more. Many such modules are “oneshots,” designed to be played and completed in a single 1–3 hour play session. Such a “one-shot” set in the library, or a fantasy equivalent thereof, might be the perfect testing ground for scholarly uses of the TTRPG.

College & Undergraduate Libraries

115

Literature review
Quite apart from other types of games and gamification, the idea of TTRPGs in general or D&D specifically in libraries is nothing new; indeed, libraries have hosted and even encouraged players for decades. As early as 1982, when D&D was still in its first edition and a minor moral panic was building around its use, Eugene Sanders was hosting games in the Michigan City Public Library and extolling its virtues, calling it “intellectually stimulating for young adults and fun to play” (Sanders 1982, p. 98). By 1992, a D&D tournament was being extolled alongside chess as “a good activity for older children who frequently lose interest in using the library during the summer” (Siegner 1992, p. 40). And by 2014, Torres-Roman and Snow were able to produce a 200page book touting TTRPGs for teen librarians as a “creative and innovative activity to involve and entertain your patrons” (p. xi). By the 2010s, major TTRPG publishers like Hasbro’s Wizards of the Coast and Paizo were regular fixtures at major library conferences, offering free materials, playtesting, and advice.
A more academic perspective has not been absent from the conversation, but has often focused on collections and cataloging. For instance, Snow also advocated in a separate 2008 piece for collecting role-playing games in libraries and helped to lay out foundational concepts and definitions for them in the library space (Snow 2008). Schneider and Hutchison (2015) followed this up with an analysis of role-playing game books held in major library collections worldwide, while Smith (2024) examined the controlled vocabulary problems that this might pose for those same collections.
There has also been a wider conversation on “gamification” of learning in education, often focused on video games but often equally applicable to TTRPGs (which have been influential in video game design). As early as 2003, Gee posited that “[g]ood computer and video games[…] are learning machines […] they get themselves learned and learned well, so that they get played long and hard by a great many people” (Gee 2003, p. 20). Writing in 2005, Gee elaborated that the process video games went through to introduce “new players to learn long, complex and difficult games” contained principles which were useful to analyze and co-opt for learning while noting that these principles were found in many non-educational commercial games, there were “[n]ot so for many in a product used in school or for business workplace learning” (Gee 2005, p. 15). Elaborating on this concept that same year, Gee and his coauthors argued in favor of video games as sparking a “new model of learning through meaningful activity in virtual worlds” (Shaffer et al. 2005, p. 111).

116

A. P. WATSON ET AL.

Beyond Gee, others have elaborated on the concept of gamification in the following years. Kapp (2012) advocated against “badges, points, and rewards” as the “least useful elements of games” while noting that “gamified learning can be, and is, difficult, challenging, and stressful” (p. 13). Walsh (2018) targeted library workers, and those that teach information skills, in particular in arguing for a wide range of gamification strategies. Pavey (2021) took the concept a step further by separating gamification strategies using digital games from those using physical games and treating both as distinct, if related, approaches.
In short, there is a wide precedent for the general use of TTRPGs in libraries, often as a teen activity or something to entice other key populations into the library space. There has also been considerable work done on the “gamification” of library learning and instruction – the use of features and facets found in both digital and physical games to encourage library learning. However, combining the two approaches – the TTRPG as outreach tool or community engagement, and the game as learning facilitator – does not seem to have attracted the same level of scholarship. The only instance of such an attempt that could be located was from Penn State, where Green (2024) used several preexisting TTRPG resources (the free Honey Heist and the current D&D 5th edition introductory adventure module Dragons of Stormreach). While Green reported qualified success in the endeavor, with ambitious plans for further expansion, these did not seem to extend to creating bespoke or custom library-centric materials.
As such, it seems that the creation of such bespoke, custom, library-­centric TTRPG materials for the purpose of gamification in an academic library is an as-yet unexplored area in professional literature and practice, one which this project attempted to explore.

Materials and methods
The authors include several experienced GMs who had run and written D&D and Pathfinder games, an experienced TTRPG map maker, and a trained graphic designer. Hoping to leverage our shared interests, the group initially discussed the feasibility for using TTRPGs as the basis for an outreach event and/or digital tools (e.g., GIS, CAD, or image editing) instruction. The group narrowed the scope to developing a library-inspired module based which would allow participants to learn useful information about using the library. The authors initially planned for OMGA to playtest the module at the end of the Spring 2024 semester, though this has been delayed due to unforeseen circumstances (extended illness and increased workloads).

College & Undergraduate Libraries

117

Early on, it was decided that a limited-scale proof of concept was the wisest course of action; as such, the focus was directed toward a “oneshot” campaign (IE a short game of limited length and scope) covering only a single floor of the library. Not only did the narrower focus allow for quicker proof-of-concept development, but the first floor was the ideal one for the pilot program because of its location and variety of commonly used library services. The circulation desk, public computers with printing and scanning services, the library classrooms, government documents and maps, as well as, the IDEALab are all housed on the first floor. There was some debate about whether the library so depicted should be contemporary or fantasy, with the former being a closer 1:1 match to the real library and the latter requiring fewer modifications to work. Ultimately, for the purposes of the proof of concept, a fantasy version of the library was selected. This allowed the map designer to use existing fantasy-themed design elements, while also leaning more into the gaming elements.
Five library employees ultimately volunteered their time and effort for the project: Elizabeth Batte, Outreach and Strategic Initiatives Librarian; Sarah Katherine Glass, Program Coordinator for the UML IDEAlab makerspace; Alex Watson, Research & Instruction Librarian; Shelby Watson, Assistant Professor for Scholar Support and Data Services; and Brian Young, Collection Strategist & Scholarly Communication Librarian. This group included several experienced GMs who had run and written games of D&D and Pathfinder, a seasoned TTRPG map maker, and a trained graphic designer; all were current or former players.
The overall outline of the project was dictated through a series of weekly brainstorming meetings, with participants then splitting up to work on assigned tasks. The team members would then bring the fruits of their labor to the next meeting for feedback, and the project goals were modified accordingly, especially as the semester ebbed and flowed with regards to other demands on members’ time and energy. It was decided to reach out to the OMGA for playtesting – and, as a possible bonus, to provide a halo effect for the library and the ability of its IDEALab to print maps and miniatures for TTRPGs. The hope was that, by showing the IDEALab’s ability to print maps and miniatures, students might be inspired to use it for their own projects.
In addition to theming, other map-related considerations were the scale and creation tool. The scale was determined based on maximizing the number of fantasy equivalent library areas, while also allowing the map to be printed at large scale using the Library’s IDEALab. This maintained the group’s original goal to use the module as a showcase for the Library’s

118

A. P. WATSON ET AL.

Table 1.  Fantasy area names.
Library area
Information commons Ainsworth room Microforms IDEALab Government documents StudioONE/editing rooms Research and Instruction Librarians Library classrooms

Fantasy equivalent
Goblin commons Sir Ainsworth’s tutors and tables Scrolls of antiquity Wizard’s workshop Royal archives Bard’s hall Information brokers Arcane classrooms

services. Though the group wanted to use open-source tools for the entire project, time dictated using DungeonDraft, a commercial tool, due to a team member’s experience with the product.
Following from the map, the group brainstormed a number of “fantasy names” for library services on the first floor – the IDEALab became the Wizard’s Workshop, the Information Commons became the Goblin Commons, the microfilm and readers became the Magic Scroll area, and so on. This, in turn, suggested “quests” related to these areas that players could complete, based on real-life issues that library patrons often experience – things like finding and reading microfilm, printing, 3D printing, locating books, etc. (Table 1).
The group ultimately decided on a short list of “library quests” for players to complete in the context of the TTRPG module: finding a book with a known title, finding a book with a known subject but unknown title, scanning and printing of a book chapter, finding a newspaper article on microfilm, and making a 3D print.
Once the basic library layout and quest structure were decided upon, the group decided to write a TTRPG module building on those themes. Based on the format of other, similar, one-shot modules from other TTRPGs, the module contained descriptions of library locations to be read aloud by the GM to players, statistics and gameplay information for the GM’s eyes only, details of interactions with enemies and NPCs, and a brief list of enemies with a glossary. This promised to be the most in-depth part of the process, with the need to balance multiple moving parts, write compelling enemies and characters, and to manage the difficulty class (or DC) that characters will need to meet or exceed with their dice roll in order to succeed.
To help players keep track of their characters’ information as well as the main quest, the group also decided to create library-specific character sheets. A TTRPG character sheet contains all of a player character’s vital statistics, such as their character’s strength and intelligence, as well as lists of their skills, and a library-specific sheet was thought to be important to helping to brand the adventure.

College & Undergraduate Libraries

119

To showcase the IDEALab’s 3D printing capabilities, the group also resolved to find or design game pieces and dice for the project. Many, but not all, TTRPGs use small statuettes to represent players, NPCs, and monsters, and given the large scale of the projected map, it promised a wide canvas on which to display them. While dice, specifically the 20-sided dice often used for TTRPGs, are neither uncommon nor expensive, printing some would help to highlight the library’s abilities in that area, as well as providing for the possibility of free dice that could be printed and given away.

Licensing
A great deal of thought was given to the ruleset that would be used for the one-shot module’s mechanics. The 2023 controversy over the legal owners of D&D, Hasbro, attempting to alter the license terms for the use of their intellectual property weighed particularly heavily on the group. A full discussion of this controversy is beyond the scope of this article, but in short Hasbro long offered players of D&D an Open Game License, or OGL, which permitted “players to craft […] their own tabletop experiences using D&D rules and mechanics, as long as they avoid reproducing official characters, settings, stories and art” (Evans-Thirlwell 2023). In early 2023, the company’s proposed updated terms, which they called OGL 1.1, were leaked on io9 (Codega 2023) causing an immediate uproar. The new terms seemed to include, among other things,
a 25 percent royalty on revenue from any OGL creator earning above $750,000 per year in sales; the right for WotC to use any content created under the license for any purpose; […] and the de-authorization of anything made according to the previous OGL. (Evans-Thirlwell 2023)
Though Hasbro quickly backpedaled in the face of massive public opposition to the scheme, choosing to re-release the materials covered by its OGL with a Creative Commons license (Evans-Thirlwell 2023), trust in the brand has been shaken and the specter of legal action for unauthorized use of D&D elements, or inadvertently giving Hasbro a license to use and sell materials made by a school using public funds, made the use of the industry-standard D&D 5th edition ruleset problematic.
Instead, the decision was made to use the Pathfinder 1st edition ruleset from Paizo, perhaps Hasbro’s largest and best-organized competitor in the TTRPG space. In addition to being a major critic of Hasbro’s proposed changes to its OGL (Evans-Thirlwell, 2023), Paizo has created a

120

A. P. WATSON ET AL.

competing open TTRPG standard in its Open RPG Creative License (Paizo Inc. 2023). This sense of openness and community support, contrasting the uncertainty coming from Hasbro, was the basis for the choice of Pathfinder 1st edition.
Based on the D&D 3.5th edition ruleset from 2003, the Pathfinder 1st edition TTRPG ruleset is broadly similar to and compatible with D&D 5th edition, meaning that experienced 5th edition players could easily switch systems and novices brought into the library space could easily adapt to D&D 5th edition. Furthermore, the basic rule books for Pathfinder 1st (and 2nd) are available as free authorized PDFs via Paizo themselves (as well as sites like Archive.org) with a huge repository of rules available in the comprehensive d20pfsrd wiki in an easily searchable form. This open-source mentality was important in ensuring that materials would be available to libraries that might not have the means to purchase physical books or PDFs separately.

Results
The library team successfully completed the fantasy adventure module within the allotted time, although there were some areas where the process did not go according to plan. The completed map and draft module were shown at the American Library Association 2024 conference in San Diego, California, along with an early bibliography and some other materials.
As noted earlier, ultimately it was not possible to invite the University of Mississippi gaming group, OMGA, into the library to playtest the oneshot module. Due to their focus on education, OMGA remains an ideal partner in utilizing or playtesting a fantasy library one shot adventure, but by the time the module was in a playable state, the semester was already over and the club had dispersed for the summer. This left neither time nor resources for a full playtest, which was moved to a future goal for the project.
The map was rendered at a one-inch scale to allow for larger player statuettes or Lego minifigures from the IDEALab collection to be used; in retrospect a somewhat smaller map might have been a better choice as the large scale resulted in considerable work for the team member creating it, and the resulting image file was 800 megabytes, making it difficult to share. Still, the team was very pleased with the final product, which was recognizable as the J.D. Williams Library but with a distinct and artful fantasy sheen. Mapping all 6 floors of the main library as well as satellite libraries was considered as a possible future “stretch goal” but dismissed for the pilot for reasons of time (Figure 1).

College & Undergraduate Libraries

121

Figure 1.  Fantasy library map.
The one-shot adventure module was set in the “Mississippi Shire School of Wizardry” near midnight on the last day of final exams, explaining the relative lack of staff in the building as well as the large numbers of fantasy characters present in the scenario. Construction was blamed for the lack of access to the upper floors of the building, and NPCs were created to fill the standard archetypes of people who might be found in the building: employees, students, student employees, and tutors. While some of the NPCs were based on real people, all of the people on whom they were based were members of the team rendered through a light fantasy parody lens (Figure 2).

122

A. P. WATSON ET AL.

Figure 2. Library map legend detail view].
For quests, the team decided on a framework that lent urgency to a scenario many players would be familiar with, namely a series of last-­minute errands for a professor to get extra credit. The quests for players to complete were written as:
- Scanning and printing a copy of Chapter 5 of the book The Chatawa Monster’s Song (scanning, printing, and finding a known-title item, with the title being based on a local cryptid).
- Locating a book about UFOs that includes the 1973 Pascagoula Abduction (finding a book on a known topic from a certain era, with the incident in question being a famous alien encounter in the state).
- A copy of an article from Thanksgiving 1990 for the Oxfordshire Roc newspaper about the Moon Man of Kilgore Hills (finding a microfilm newspaper article, with the paper name a parody of the local Oxford Eagle and the topic being another local paranormal encounter).

College & Undergraduate Libraries

123

Figure 3. Excerpt from module.
- A 3D-conjured “summoning orb” from the Wizard’s Workshop (printing something with a 3D printer in the IDEALab.
Each quest had complications written in as well; enemies in the way, wizards using the “magic scroll” (microfilm) readers, a corrupted print file that would summon a powerful foe, the players having forgotten their student IDs for printing purposes, learning to use mobile shelving, and more. Where possible, encounters drew on local lore (as with the cryptids above) or school lore (as with the presence of a “bathroom ghost” similar to the one said to haunt the library) (Figure 3).
Character sheets were created for players that followed a folding “zine format” that allowed them to be compact yet information-dense, complete with a space for players to draw their character’s portrait and a list of quest objectives. These sheets, which were either available blank or prefilled, can be printed on any normal inkjet printer and follow a lightly stripped-down version of the Pathfinder 1st edition rules. Certain mechanics, like the Combat Maneuver Bonus and Combat Maneuver Defense, were removed while the number of available skills was streamlined and

124

A. P. WATSON ET AL.

simplified. Only three character classes – fighter, wizard, and rogue – were available, again for simplicity’s sake (Figure 4).
Finally, using free files available on Thingiverse, the group downloaded and 3D printed an assortment of figures. Thanks to the wide variety of free files available, it was relatively simple to find 3D printing files that matched both players and enemies well. It was also technically feasible to print dice, though they were much better as souvenirs than as dice, since they tended to be poorly weighted and difficult to roll (Figure 5).

Discussion
The creation of a one-shot TTRPG adventure module set in a fictionalized version of the J.D. Williams Library was more labor intensive than the group had originally thought, and plans needed to be scaled back several times. The map and module, in particular, were complex undertakings that took a great deal of time to complete; a smaller map and a simpler module (possibly a modification of an existing module with appropriate permissions) might make the project more feasible for future projects. At the same time, the map (made in Dungeondraft) attracted a great deal of notice from attendees at ALA and TTRPG players that the group was able to approach. A good balance between a smaller map but with emphasis on a colorful, eye-catching design might be ideal. The module, for its part, was written with a large amount of extra text to account for possible confusion or unfamiliarity with the rules of TTRPGs, which helped to inflate both the time it took to compose and the complexity of its composition. Using an experienced GM, who could train players on the fly and fill in gaps in the module from their knowledge, might be a good way to reduce complexity without sacrificing quality in that respect.
As noted above, it proved very difficult to playtest the module due to schedule problems. The illness of the primary liaison to the OMGA group was a setback in this area, but the ebb and flow of an academic semester also precluded it, with the members of the group tending to be extremely busy during most of March and the students departing and unavailable by the first week of May. In many ways, this bears out the old adage that “schedule problems are the deadliest D&D monster,” but they could ultimately be mitigated with a less aggressive timeline. Setting aside a period to write the module and make the map, for instance, followed by a later period for playtesting might be a good way to deal with this issue, and it could be extended to other types of library (such as public libraries) with very different busy seasons.

College & Undergraduate Libraries

125

Figure 4.  Foldable zine-style character sheet.

126

A. P. WATSON ET AL.

Figure 5.  3D-Printed miniatures on full-scale map.
The use of “zine-style” folding character sheets similarly attracted many positive notices when presented both at ALA and to TTRPGplaying peers. Given the simplicity of this style of character sheet, its small size, and its ability to be made using inkjet printers, it seems like a guaranteed candidate for inclusion in any subsequent project(s). The 3D printing of miniatures was also very successful, even if the 20-sided

College & Undergraduate Libraries

127

dice produced were ultimately better as tchotchkes than as instruments of chance.
In terms of next steps, the authors would ideally like to test the module on a live audience of players. Testing with both experienced players from an organization like OMGA and novice players who are merely tabletop-curious might help in determining how best to revise the module going forward or how to craft new ones. Through the process of assembling the one-shot module, a number of possible scholarly/pedagogical uses for such a game suggested themselves. There include:
- Using a custom TTRPG campaign to highlight the ability of a makerspace like the IDEALab to print posters, make 3D prints, and emphasize it as a space that can be fun as a “halo effect.”
- Bringing in novice library users with a custom TTRPG campaign as an enticement. This is similar to ideas explored by Green (2024) as above, but with the addition of a module and map that are specific to the library setting, rather than one which is premade.
- Attracting experienced TTRPG players who are not heavy library users with a custom TTRPG campaign, possibly with the added enticement of the availability of makerspace equipment to support their own play.
- Using a custom TTRPG campaign to teach basic library skills to small group who might need to know them and also be receptive to that method of instruction.
The above will require a framework with which to evaluate their efficacy, and the authors have discussed possible frameworks for both the one-shot customer TTRPG campaign as written and other, future endeavors. Both Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educational Objectives (Bloom & Krathwohl 1984) and Gee’s What Video Games Have to Teach Us About Learning and Literacy (2007) have been suggested as possible frameworks for this sort of scholarship during these discussions.

Conclusion
Using a minimum of staff time and resources, it was possible for a group of five interested academic librarians to assemble a complete, custom TTRPG one-shot module set in a fantasy version of their academic library in just over a single semester. Given slightly more modest goals and a less looming deadline, it seems that a group of librarians would to be able to do the same for their own library at an even sharper pace, possibly creating an artifact that can serve both as a publicity and pedagogical tool. While the efficacy of this approach – and the framework with which its success might be measured – are still up for debate, the possibility of doing so has been

128

A. P. WATSON ET AL.

firmly established by this proof of concept, which will hopefully inspire many other library adventures to follow.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

ORCID
Alex P. Watson Brian W. Young

http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1200-1962 http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7292-7938

References
Bloom, B. S., and D. R. Krathwohl. 1984. Taxonomy of Educational Objectives: The Classification of Educational Goals. London: Longman.
Codega, L. 2023. Dungeons & Dragons’ New License Tightens Its Grip on Competition. Gizmodo. (January 5). https://gizmodo.com/dnd-wizards-of-the-coast-ogl-1-1-open-gaminglicense-1849950634
Evans-Thirlwell, E. 2023. The D&D Open Game License Controversy, Explained. The Washington Post. washingtonpost.com/video-games/2023/01/19/dungeons-and-dragons-opengame-license-wizards-of-the-coast-explained/
Gee, J. P. 2003. “What Video Games Have to Teach us about Learning and Literacy.” Computers in Entertainment 1 (1):20. https://doi.org/10.1145/950566.950595.
Gee, J. P. 2005. “Learning by Design: Good Video Games as Learning Machines.” E-Learning and Digital Media 2 (1):5–16. https://doi.org/10.2304/elea.2005.2.1.5.
Gee, J. P. 2007. What Video Games Have to Teach us About Learning and Literacy. 2nd ed. New York, NY: St. Martin’s Griffin.
Green, K. E. C. 2024. D&D Academy: A Tabletop Roleplaying Game Workshop Series for Undergraduate Students. [Poster]. San Diego, CA: American Library Association Annual Conference & Exhibition.
Kapp, K. M. 2012. The Gamification of Learning and Instruction: Game-Based Methods and Strategies for Training and Education. 1st ed. Austin, TX: Pfeiffer.
Paizo Inc. 2023. Paizo Announces System-Neutral Open RPG License. Redmond, WA: Paizo Blog. https://paizo.com/community/blog/v5748dyo6si7v
Pavey, S. 2021. Playing Games in the School Library: Developing Game-Based Lessons and Using Gamification Concepts. 1st ed. London: Facet Publishing.
Sanders, E. R. 1982. “Dungeons and Dragons in a Public Library.” Indiana Libraries 2 (3):93–8. https://journals.indianapolis.iu.edu/index.php/IndianaLibraries/article/view/17218
Schneider, E., and B. Hutchison. 2015. “Referencing the Imaginary: An Analysis of Library Collection of Role-Playing Game Materials.” The Reference Librarian 56 (3):174–88. https://doi.org/10.1080/02763877.2014.1002716.
Shaffer, D. W., K. R. Squire, R. Halverson, and J. P. Gee. 2005. “Video Games and the Future of Learning.” Phi Delta Kappan 87 (2):105–11. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 003172170508700205.
Siegner, C. 1992. “Dragon Tales.” 1992 Montana Summer Reading Program Librarian’s Manual. Helena: Montana State Library.

College & Undergraduate Libraries

129

Smith, T. S. 2024. “A Dicey Situation: A Study of How Controlled Vocabularies Describe Tabletop Roleplaying Games.” Cataloging & Classification Quarterly 62 (2):99–123. https://doi.org/10.1080/01639374.2024.2308117.
Snow, C. 2008. “Dragons in the Stacks: An Introduction to Role‐Playing Games and Their Value to Libraries.” Collection Building 27 (2):63–70. https://doi.org/10.1108/01604950810870218.
Torres-Roman, S. A., and C. E. Snow. 2014. Dragons in the Stacks: A Teen Librarian’s Guide to Tabletop Role-Playing. London: Bloomsbury Publishing USA.
Walsh, A. 2018. The Librarians’ Book on Teaching through Games and Play. Delhi, India: Innovative Libraries.

