 
 
 
 
 
Research Proposal: Games-based Library Services Study & Needs Assessment 
 
 
 
Christopher J. Baker 
School of Information Studies, University of Wisconsin -Milwaukee 
INFOST 799-201: Introduction to Research Methods in Information Studies 
Dr. Jin Zhang 
May 10, 2024 

1 
 
   
 
 
Research Proposal: Games -based Library Services Study & Needs Assessment  
 
Abstract 
 This research project proposes an in -depth investigation into the role and impact of 
games-based library services within public libraries throughout the United States. By employing 
two distinct questionnaires (one targeting library staff responsible for implementing games -based 
services – like library programs and collections – and another aimed at the library patrons said 
services are designed to engage ), the study seeks to gain a comprehensive understanding of the 
both the current landscape of games-based services in American public libraries as well as 
respective libraries’ community response to them. The project’s ultimate goal is to generate 
valuable data-driven insights that might guide advocacy for and the development and 
enhancement of such services, ensuring that libraries might more effectively meet the modern 
needs and interests of a contemporary patron-base. Alternatively, if the study demonstrates that 
games-based library services are not especially desired by American library communities, the 
data will help libraries avoid unnecessary time and resource allotment toward  implementing such 
services. In either case, outcomes of this research project could significantly  assist librarians in 
making informed decisions regarding games -based library services. 
 
Introduction 
As technological innovation  continues to occur at a seemingly exponential rate while 
widespread accessibility to (and interest of) modern media has become the norm for American 
households, many public libraries have found themselves in the position of needing to evolve, 
enhance, and diversify their library services in order to better meet the contemporary needs and 
interests of their patron base. While American libraries’ collections and programs are  rife with 
offerings and experiences related to books, movies, arts & crafts, and more, comprehensive data 
about multiformat games -based library services is remarkably absent, despite modern gaming’s 
overwhelming popularity. 
This lack of games-based knowledge for the field could have serious and lasting 
consequences when it comes to serving the modern library patron. A recent comprehensive 
report released by the American Library Association titled Gen Z and Millennials: How They 

2 
 
   
 
Use Public Libraries and Identify Through Media has indicated that as many as 53% of Gen Z 
and Millennial users identify as “gamers” ( Inman Berens & Noorda, 202 3). What’s more, the 
report indicates that these gaming library users are also avid readers , which presents an immense 
circulation and service usage possibility for librarians; t his is epitomized by a quote of Dr. 
Noorda’s in the report, where she states: 
“Great news: Younger generations of people are reading books, buying books, and 
visiting libraries,” … “Not only are Gen Z and Millennials engaging with books, but they 
are also engaging with other forms of media. They are gamers, readers, writers, and fans 
who are comfortable with malleability between media categories and forms.”  
 
The report outlines the importance of diversifying library media offerings further, outlining that:  
Libraries are drawing even Gen Z and Millennials who don’t self -identify as readers. 
More than half of the 43 percent of Gen Z and Millennials who don’t self -identify as 
readers have been to their local library in the past 12 months. “These digitally -immersed 
generations make clear that libraries are about more than books,” said ALA President 
Emily Drabinski. “Programming relevant to teens and their parents – coding clubs, job 
application help, gaming – draws even non-readers to the library, as does the phy sical 
space to connect and collaborate .” 
 
Ultimately, the influence of more appropriately reaching  Gen Z and Millennial library 
users will have far-lasting impacts beyond simply affecting current generations of patrons ; these 
users will make families of their own, bring them to the library, thus creating the future ‘library 
users of tomorrow’ – library users who will have potentially grown up appreciating the diverse 
and cutting edge media options their libraries opted to offer , resulting in a positive feedback loop 
of library appreciation and inve stment. 
This research project proposal aims to ameliorate the current games-based library 
services knowledge gap by effectuating an intricate process of relevant data acquisition and 
analysis. The project would include a detailed look at both the current landscape of games-based 
library service implementations in American public libraries as well as their reception within 
participating libraries’ communities. Study outcomes would  keenly illuminate the status of 
modern gaming as offered in public libraries , gauge patrons’ interest and desire for such services , 

3 
 
   
 
and assess games-based library service usage, thereby providing valuable insights for future 
libraries’ service development, budgeting, policy-making, and more. 
Functionally, the research would be structured around two dependent variables: 
“community interest in games-based library services” and “usage of games-based library 
services”. These variables are examined in relation to two independent variables: “libraries’ 
current games-based library services offerings”, and “community/patron demographics”. By 
investigating the relationships between these variables, the study seeks to answer pivotal 
questions about both the frequency and rigor of games-based library services as they relate to 
general patron desire for these types of services, and any effect that demographi c identifiers 
might have in relation to usage and interest.  
Population-wise, the study will investigate these variables within the scope of two key 
groups: public library staff involved in service planning and management, and public library 
patrons who engage with or could potentially engage with games-based library services. The 
research design (outlined more thoroughly later in this paper)  targets a substantial sample size of 
library staff and users throughout the United States; the  ambitious scope of the study’s subject 
population goal would ensure diverse representation of staff and patrons from different regions, 
library sizes, and more. Robust data collection and analysis are central to the study’s research; 
the study’s wide-reaching data will be subject to comprehensive analysis that will employ both 
descriptive and inferential statistics examinations. 
In the end, the study’s findings promise to  result in informative conclusions that would be 
directly useable by practicing library staff to better serve their patrons,  significantly impacting 
public libraries’ decisions regarding games-based library services – all while meaningfully 
contributing to the broader field of library and information science  research as a whole. Directly 
put: public libraries need to examine more thoroughly  (and in all likelihood, integrate) games -
based library services ; this study could serve as a foundational project to help public libraries 
meet this goal. 
 
Research Problem 
The study’s research problem centers around the lack of extensive research into  
implementation metrics and reception of games -based library services in public libraries 
throughout the United States. Despite the all-time high (and ever-growing) popularity of modern 

4 
 
   
 
games-based mediums (like video games, board games, tabletop role -playing games, and 
collectible/competitive card games), there is a significant gap in our understanding of how 
thoroughly games-based services are being utilized in American public libraries, and if/how 
games-based services are desired within their communities. Additionally, professional library 
education/training programs lack core learning opportunities surrounding games -based library 
services integration (Elkins & Hollister, 2020). 
This lack of knowledge poses a barrier to the development and improvement of  games-
based library services  that might effectively cater to contemporary community needs and 
interests; if libraries do not properly research and meet modern media/service interests of library 
patrons, they run the risk of experiencing declining usage, and being seen as ‘irrelevant’ in the 
eyes of their patrons (and funding bodies)  (Adams, 2009). On the other side of the coin , if 
libraries impulsively opt to spend time and money developing robust games-based library 
programs and collections without investigating patrons’ actual desire for them, they run the risk 
of wasting precious resources on unpopular offerings. This proposed study would result in 
valuable information that could help amend both of these potential concerns.  
 
“Games-based Library Services” Defined 
It’s important for those involved in the study to  understand what exactly “games-based 
library services” [hereto referred to GBLS] encompasses. In the context of this study, “games -
based” means any library experiences/offerings directly centered around modern gaming media 
(including formats like video games, board games, tabletop role -playing games [TTRPGS], 
virtual and augmented reality games [VR and ARGs], and collectible/competitive card games). 
“Services” refers to any library offerings intended to be utilized/experienced by library patrons 
(like in-person or virtual programs, circulating collections, drop-in/“library use only” collections, 
informational displays, take-home “passive program” kits, giveaways, and more). 
As such, GBLS could be defined as “library experiences/offerings directly centered 
around modern gaming media like video games, board games, TTRPGs, VR and ARGs, 
collectible/competitive card games, and other related contemporary gaming formats.” In order to 
ensure that surveyees are informed about the concept’s meaning , GBLS will be properly defined 
in the respective questionnaires’ introductions. Furthermore, surveyees will be given contact 

5 
 
   
 
information to reach out to  in order to seek clarification about study terminology in case there is 
any confusion. 
 
Research Questions & Hypothesis 
The study’s research questions are as follows: ‘What is the current state of GBLS 
offerings in public libraries?’, and ‘Is there a demand for more of said services in public library 
communities?’. Furthermore, ‘Does the presence and variety of games -based library services 
correlate with some level of community interest and the frequency of service usage ?’. Finally, 
‘How do patron demographics relate to interest in GBLS , if at all?’. 
Related to these research questions, my hypotheses  are: 
1. There are fewer libraries that prioritize offering GBLS than those that do not; i.e., 
many libraries likely do not offer GBLS in any form, and most libraries that do 
offer them likely do not resource them with time and funding the way that they 
might be resourcing non-games-based library programs and collections  – despite 
modern gaming’s popularity. 
2. Libraries that offer GBLS (and those that prioritize offering robust GBLS in 
particular) will report them as being very popular with their patron-base. 
3. Patrons will report meaningful usage and an overall positive response to  GBLS 
where libraries offer them; where libraries do not offer GBLS (or do not offer 
especially robust GBLS), patrons will report that they desire more of them . 
4. Youth patrons, Teen patrons and Adult Patrons aged 18  to ≈40 will express 
significant interest in GBLS, while Adult Patrons aged ≈41+ will not express as 
much interest. 
 
Purpose of Study 
 The purpose of this study is to use both a library staff -facing “Games-based Services 
Implementation Questionnaire” (Appendix A) and a patron-facing “Games-based Library 
Services Needs Assessment Survey” (Appendix B) to gather response data that would provide a 
detailed understanding of the current state of GBLS in public libraries throughout America, their 
reception within surveyed libraries’ communities, whether surveyed libraries’ communities 

6 
 
   
 
desire more GBLS, and how library user demographics might correlate with GBLS 
interest/desire. 
By investigating any correlation between the presence and variety of these services  and 
the level of community interest /usage of them, the study aims to provide librarians with 
actionable data related to current implementation prevalence and patron desire of GBLS, which 
can help librarians advocate for funds related to developing and maintaining GBLS, while also 
aiding in GBLS-related programming/collection development decision -making processes. 
Correlations might indicate that certain types of GBLS are desired more than others, and/or that 
certain GBLS are more successful in terms of usage than others.  
Alternatively, if the study demonstrates a lack of desire/need for GBLS as expressed by 
patrons, or an obvious lack of popularity by library staff already implementing them, libraries 
can use that information to allot their time and resources toward other types of programs and 
collections. In either case, study results will serve as a modern “snapshot”  of the current status of 
games-based library services in America, and will be able to be used as a foundational project to 
be built upon with any  future research in the space. 
 
Literature Review 
 While robust GBLS surveying has not yet been done with the scale and precision this 
project aims to, there are still numerous journal articles, reports, blog posts, websites, recent 
studies, and more that add helpful context to the general exploration and efficacy of public 
library-centered gaming services. These pieces fall into multiple different library and/or games -
related categories, including research about the beneficial learning principles of games, the 
popularity/pervasiveness of gaming, recent research/reports abou t modern library users and their 
interests/needs, successful researcher/library practitioner partnerships, best practices for games -
based services integration (via programs and collections), and more. This paper will offer a brief 
outline and overview of some of the most useful, well -developed, contemporary, and accessible 
writings among the aforementioned categories. 
Understanding the interests and needs of modern library users is crucial for the 
development of effective library services. Recent research  from the American Library 
Association’s report titled 2022 Public Library Services for Strong Communities: Results from 
The 2022 PLA Survey suggests that today's library users value a wide range of services, from 

7 
 
   
 
traditional book lending to digital resources and community programs  (Goek, et al., 2023). They 
appreciate libraries as spaces for learning, creativity, and community engagement. Furthermore, 
as illustrated in Noorda & Inman Berens’ 2021 article Immersive Media and Books 2020: New 
Insights About Book Pirates, Libraries and Discovery, Millennials, And Cross -Media 
Engagement: Before and During Covid, there is a growing interest in interactive and experiential 
learning opportunities, which games -based library services can provide. The needs and interests 
of library users can vary widely depending on factors such as age, education level, and 
community context; therefore, it is important for libraries to regularly assess the desires and 
interests of their users to ensure that their services remain relevant and effective . This crucial 
library services evolutionary concept is effectively highlighted in  Dr. Abigail Phillips’ and 
Victor Lee’s 2019 book Reconceptualizing Libraries: Perspectives from The Information and 
Learning Sciences. 
Considering these facts about modern library users, it would behoove librarians to 
understand just how utterly popular modern gaming (via multiple different formats) has become. 
The pervasiveness and enthusiasm surrounding gaming in modern society is unden iable; with the 
advent of digital technology  especially, games have become a ubiquitous part of our culture 
(Howarth, 2024). Video games, board games, and collectible/competitive card games a re played 
by people of all ages, from children to adults, and acr oss various platforms, from analog options, 
to consoles, to computers, and to mobile devices; the video gaming industry in particular has 
seen significant growth  among all formats, with revenues surpassing those of the film and music 
industries, as highlighted by the Entertainment Software Association’s 2023 Essential Facts 
About the U.S. Video Game Industry . It’s not just about digital games, though, with games -based 
popularity extending to various genres and types games; recent articles by Jon Cherry (titled 
What’s Behind The Rise in Popularity Of Board Games ?, from 2023), Jaclyn Peiser (Why Board 
Games Are Quickly Regaining Popularity , 2024), and PlayToday.co’s writer ‘Florence’ (What 
Percentage of People Play Board Games, 2024) all illustrate multi-modal games’ popularity. 
The widespread pervasiveness of games suggests a high potential for their use in library services  
for years to come, as expressed by the American Library Association Games and Gaming Round 
Table on their webpage titled Why Have Games in Libraries?  (ALA GameRT, 2024c). 
 In order for libraries to be successful, t he integration of games -based services requires 
careful planning and implementation. Like Sandra Abrams emphasized in her 2021 article 

8 
 
   
 
Checked Out? Videogame Programming in U.S. Libraries and Implications for Videogame 
Literacies, best practices suggest starting with a clear understanding of the library's goals and the 
needs and interests of its users; the selection of games should align with these goals and interests. 
Libraries should also consider the logistics of implementing games -based services, such as the 
availability of space and resources , and any training for library staff that may be necessary to 
ensure that they are comfortable facilitating games -based activities. Carlie Forsythe’s 2021 
article Game On! Recreational Play in the Library: Reflections of a Board Game  Librarian, Post 
et. al’s 2023 article A Colossal Catalog Adventure: Representing Indie Video Games and Game 
Creators in Library Catalogs, and Robson, Phillips, and Guerro’s 2018 article Don’t Just Roll 
the Dice: Simple Solutions for Circulating Tabletop Game Collections Effectively In Your 
Library all do a stellar job of exploring such logistical needs – and their solutions. In an ongoing 
basis, libraries should regularly evaluate the effectiveness of their games -based services and 
adjust as necessary; Goodridge and Rohweder’s 2022 book Librarian’s Guide to Games and 
Gamers: From Collection Development to Advisory Services does an excellent job of 
compartmentalizing the work required to successfully integrate GBLS smoothly into library 
operations while continuously evaluating their success, allowing for effective  long-term 
programming and collection revision. It’s not always easy, but despite such challenges, Christa 
Hill outlines in her 2016 article Play On: The Use of Games in Libraries  that the successful 
integration of games-based services can greatly enhance the library experience for users.  
In advocating for stronger GBLS, it can be helpful for libraries to have language and 
research that backs up the social and emotional benefits that games can provide to their users 
(Farber, 2021). Fortunately, games as a medium have long been recognized for their potential to 
facilitate effective learning; one of the most foundational works on the subject is James Paul 
Gee’s 2008 book What Video Games Have to Teach Us About Learning and Literacy. The 
interactive nature of games allows players to engage with content in a dyna mic way, promoting 
active learning, critical thinking, situated experience, and more;  games can provide immediate 
feedback, allowing players to adjust their strategies and learn from their mistakes. They can also 
foster problem-solving skills, as players must often navigate complex systems and make strategic 
decisions to achieve their objectives. Furthermore, games can promote collaboration and 
communication, as many games require players to work together to achieve common goals. All 
of these beneficial com ponents are robustly explored by the author of this paper’s previous work,  

9 
 
   
 
Video Games: Their Effect on Society and How We Must Modernize Our Pedagogy for Students 
Of The Digital Age (Baker, 2014). The motivational aspects of games, such as the desire to 
achieve high scores or complete challenges, can also encourage players to engage deeply with 
the content. These learning principles align well with contemporary pedagogical theories, which 
emphasize the importance of active learning, feedback, problem -solving, collaboration, and 
motivation in promoting effective learning.  Some of the best literature on the intersection of 
learning, service, and libraries ha ve been written by Jared A. Seay, the Reference & Instruction 
Librarian/Media Services Coordinator at the Addlestone Library of the College of Charleston in 
South Carolina; valuable articles of his include:  
o Considering Games and Gamification in Libraries & Associated Entities — In Praise of 
Real People (2018) 
o Considering Games and Gamification in Libraries & Associated Entities — Surely, You 
Can’t Be Serious: When Library Folk Go Game (2018) 
o Considering Games and Gamification in Libraries & Associated Entities — The “G” 
Word (2018) 
o Considering Games and Gamification in Libraries & Associated Entities — How the 
Longing for Tabletops Has Revitalized Games (2018) 
o Considering Games in Libraries and Such — Space Guardians: New Year’s Musings of 
How Libraries of Old (Including but Not Necessarily Old Librarians) Have Returned Just 
in Time to Save Us From Digital Anxiety (2021) 
o Considering Games in Libraries and Such — The Ultimate Library Instruction (2021) 
o Considering Games in Libraries and Such — A Liminal Response to Watching Paint Dry  
(2021) 
o Considering Games in Libraries and Such — On Using a Game to Actually Teach 
Something (2021) 
o Gaming & Libraries (2024) 
Finally, it’s important to consider how s uccessful partnerships between researchers and 
library practitioners could greatly enhance the quality and impact of library services. Such 
partnerships can facilitate the integration of research findings into practice, ensuring that library 
services are evidence-based. They can also promote the generation of new knowledge throu gh 

10 
 
   
 
collaborative research projects. Furthermore, these partnerships can enhance the professional 
development of library practitioners, equipping them with the skills and knowledge to implement 
effective services. A second-to-none example of librarian/researcher collaboration can be seen in 
what is called the PolarVR Project (https://polarvr.wisc.edu/ ), which sees the partnership of 
“rural librarians, bilingual science communicators, polar scientists and a technical team to create 
a series of five bilingual virtual reality (VR) experiences, engaging users as polar explorers of 
exotic and extreme environments to enhance STEM understandi ng and appreciation.” Ponto, et 
al. explore the project thoroughly in their recent 2023 paper Waddle: Using Virtual Penguin 
Embodiment as A Vehicle For Empathy And Informal Learning . 
 
Study Components, Research Procedures, and Analysis Strategy 
For this study, there are two dependent variable s. The first dependent variable is 
Community Interest in GBLS; this will be measured via relevant responses to specific survey 
questions about library users’ interest in different types of GBLS, and will help answer the 
question of whether American public libraries’ communities would like to see more GBLS 
implemented. The second dependent variable is Usage of GBLS; this will be quantified through 
questionnaire data on the frequency and duration of GBLS usage by community member 
respondents, and will help clarify whether GBLS are popular or not where they’re already 
implemented. 
We will be considering two  independent variables for the study, as well. The first 
independent variable is GBLS Offerings; e.g., the presence and extent of GBLS being offered in 
participating public libraries. This IV will help determine whether there is a correlation or not 
between libraries that frequently offer GBLS (or do not offer GBLS, or do not offer especially 
robust GBLS) and measured interest in them by their communities. The second will be 
Community Demographics; e.g., whether factors such as age, education level, and frequency of 
library usage (as reported in the patron questionnaire) affect desire for and usage of GBLS.  
There are two populations for the study: public library staff involved in the planning, 
implementation, and management of library services (like collection development and program 
design/facilitation), and public library patrons – community individuals who engage with or 
have the potential to engage with GBLS. In order to ensure robustness of data and 
comprehensive library characterization within the results, this study would aim to utilize a 

11 
 
   
 
substantial sample size to analyze, with a target goal of surveying at least one (but preferably 
more) staff member(s) from approximately 1,700 public libraries across the United States. This 
ambitious number was determined based on the total number of public libraries in the country , 
which was identified as ≈17,278 as of 2019 (ALA, 2019); thus, our target number amounts to 
approximately 10% of American public libraries, which would ensure a diverse representation 
from different regions and library sizes . For the patron survey, the study would aim to gather 
feedback from an average of 20 patrons from each participating library, resulting in an estimated 
total of 34,000 patron responses. The study’s minimum survey goal would be 850 public libraries 
throughout the United States (5% of countrywide public libraries), and 17,000 patrons.  
To reach such an aggressive number of libraries and patrons, the study would employ a 
leadership-based, “top down” promotion/communication approach by partnering with the Chief 
Officers of State Library Agencies ( COSLA, 2024), and the American Library Association 
Games & Gaming Round Table  via their various social media and networking channels ( ALA 
GameRT, 2024a, 2024b) to nationally disseminate (and encourage) the call for participation.  
This tactic should result in sufficient library involvement and  would provide the study with 
persuasive data. 
Once the call for participation has resulted in an adequate number of interested libraries  
(who will have provided contact information via link to a basic form), the actual subject selection 
and data collection process would be completed; first, a stratified random sampling of varied 
public libraries across different states  would be selected (to account for subgroup attributes like 
regional demographics, differently-resourced libraries, urban vs. metropolitan libraries,  etc.), and 
program and collection development-responsible staff at these libraries would be asked to 
complete the Games-based Services Implementation Questionnaire . Those librarians would in 
turn be given simple instructions (via email) to offer the Games-based Community Needs 
Assessment Survey to a stratified random sampling of individuals within their communities  (to 
account for subgroup attributes like age, education level, frequency of library usage, etc.).  
Instrumentation for the study will include two Qualtrics questionnaires (also referred to 
as “surveys” to use common language for patrons)  to collect data from library patrons and the 
staff that serve them. These questionnaires will be designed to gather detailed responses on the 
variety and depth of offered GBLS (from staff), and the level of community interest /usage of 

12 
 
   
 
these service (from patrons) , respectively. Both questionnaires will collect demographic 
information for analysis. 
The data acquired from the questionnaires will be organized using Microsoft Excel for 
readability (Microsoft, n.d.). Statistical software, such as IBM® SPSS® Statistics  will then be 
used to thoroughly analyze the data in order to identify any trends and correlations between the 
presence and variety of GBLS and their level of community interest /usage (IBM, n.d.); the data 
collected from the questionnaires will be subjected to rigorous statistical analysis, and 
descriptive statistics will be used to summarize the data and provide a clear overview of the 
current state of GBLS offerings/usage in public libraries. Additionally, inferential statistics – 
including chi-square tests for categorical variables (Biswal, 2023) and t-tests for continuous 
variables – will be used to identify significant relationships and differences between study 
metrics. Regression analysis might also be employed to predict the  long-term impact of certain 
factors on the interest and usage of GBLS (Simplilearn, 2024). Finally, the analysis will generate 
illustrative graphs and flowcharts to visually represent the findings, aiding in the interpretation 
and application of the study’s results/findings  for libraries and library users nationwide . 
Potential limitations that will could affect the study might include response bias, where 
respondents may not accurately report their interest or usage of services, and limited 
generalizability due to the scope of our sample size (being country-wide). Additionally, while a 
stratified random sampling approach aims to provide a representative sample, library staff and 
patron respondents may not accurately represent all mitigating factors and  potential library 
communities; thus, the findings may not be applicable to all possible libraries considering the 
results. It should be noted that e nsuring the ethical integrity of the study’s research is of 
paramount importance . All participants will be informed about the purpose of the study  in the 
survey introduction and accompanying email/website descriptions . Participation is entirely 
voluntary, and all responses will be anonymous; while indirect identifiers will be asked for, no 
personally identifiable information will be collected. Additionally, data will be stored securely 
and only accessible to the research team. Any reports or publications resulting from the research 
will present aggregated data, ensuring that individual responses cannot be identified.  
Ultimately, this study and process will offer tangible measurement metrics in the wa y of 
questionnaire majority responses, correlative response identifiers, and more, which will help us 
determine what affect our independent variables might purportedly have on our dependent 

13 
 
   
 
variables (if any), and whether our proposed hypotheses are rejected or not -- especially when 
considered in the scope of our research questions.  
 
Project Schedule 
It is anticipated that a year will be required to successfully complete the study.  If more 
time is required than anticipated, the Principal Investigator will notify the funding body to 
account for unexpected time/costs.  
• The first two months will be dedicated to the development  and revision of the 
questionnaires [draft example surveys are included in appendices A and B at the end of 
this paper]. This will involve designing the questionnaires and testing them for validity 
and reliability with a small focus group.  
• Months three through five will involve promoting the study and survey opportunity to 
acquire a viable library response pool, before stratified random sampling to identify exact 
library participants, and then finally distributing the questionnaires to the selected 
libraries.  
• The following four months will be allocated for appropriate library staff and patron data 
collection, allowing ample time for respondents to complete the questionnaires.  
• The final three months will be used for data  organization/examination and report 
writing/distribution, during which the collected data will be analyzed, findings will be 
interpreted, and a comprehensive report will be written  and disseminated. 
The anticipated twelve-month schedule is illustrated in the following Gantt chart:  
 


14 
 
   
 
Itemized Budget (Draft) 
The budget for this research project is relatively constrained and straightforward;  the 
following numbers are estimated amounts that would likely cover each cost area for successful 
completion of the study as outlined above. Note that this budget accounts for staffing costs as 
being already relevant work to be integrated into Principal Investigator’s existent job. 
• Questionnaire Development: $3,000 – This includes costs for designing, testing, and 
refining the questionnaires. 
• Data Collection: $5,000 – This covers the distribution of questionnaires and the 
collection of responses. 
• Data Analysis: $4,000 – This includes costs for data organization and statistical analysis 
software. 
• Report Writing: $2,000 – This covers the time and resources needed to interpret the 
findings and write a comprehensive report.  
• Travel and Lodging: $4,000 – This budget line will help cover costs for meetings and 
presentations related to the project.  
• Stipends for Participating Libraries:  $5,000 – While we will not be able to provide 
robust compensation to surveyee locations, this is to incentivize libraries to participate in 
the study. 
• Publication/Documentation/Dissemination : $2,000 - This covers the costs of making 
the research findings publicly available.  
• Consultant Services: $1,500 – This is for any unexpected external expertise needed 
during the project. 
• Computer Services: $500 – This covers any additional computer software costs or 
services needed. 
• Administrative Costs for Partners : $1,000 – This is to cover any overhead 
administrative costs incurred by partner organizations involved in the project.  
 
o TOTAL ESTIMATED COST: $30,000 
 
 

15 
 
   
 
Study Significance, Anticipated Implications, and Conclusion 
The significance of a comprehensive community needs assessment and corresponding 
study of games-based library services integration cannot be overstated. In an era where 
information is increasingly digital and interactive, public libraries must evolve to remain 
relevant, responsive, and forward -thinking. They must adapt to the changing landscape of 
information dissemination and consumption, and GBLS offer a promising avenue for such 
adaptation. 
The potential implications of this study are manifold : 
o Firstly, the findings could significantly impact public libraries’ programming, 
collection development, and  other service-based decisions. By understanding the 
community’s interest and usage patterns of GBLS, libraries can tailor their 
offerings to better meet the needs and preferences of their patrons. This could lead 
to heightened patron satisfaction and increased library usage, thereby reinforcing 
the role of libraries as vital community hubs.  
o Secondly, the study could provide valuable insights into the current allocation of 
resources libraries use to fund and structure their programs and collections; i f the 
patron surveys indicate meaningful interest in GBLS, libraries can use the 
information to advocate for stronger collection development and programming 
budgets related to gaming. Alternatively, if patrons express a  lack of interest for 
GBLS, the findings could help librarians avoid spending precious time and 
resources on undesired program and collection development options.  In either 
case, the study would allow libraries to focus their efforts  on the services most 
appreciated and likely to be utilized by their communities, optimizing  service 
delivery. 
o Thirdly, the research would contribute significantly to the broader field of library 
and information science. Despite the growing popularity of  gaming worldwide, 
there is a noticeable gap in library science-based literature (and, perhaps more 
important, professional library training/education) on the topic. This study could 
help fill this gap by providing empirical data on the interest and usage of GBLS in 
public libraries, stimulating further research in the area, and leading to a richer 
understanding of the role and potential of GBLS in library operations. 

16 
 
   
 
o Lastly, the study could have future-facing implications beyond the immediate 
context of public libraries ; the findings could inform policy decisions related to 
library funding and support, and could open up new collaboration and partnership 
pathways with other institutions, organizations, and agencies within libraries’ 
communities – particularly those looking to engage their audiences in innovative 
ways. 
In conclusion, this study represents a significant and much-needed step towards 
understanding the role of GBLS in public libraries as well as their potential to enhance library 
offerings. By shedding light on community interest and usage of GBLS, the study would provide 
actionable and accessible data that to  help libraries remain at the forefront of information 
services while meeting the evolving needs of their communities. As we navigate the complexities 
of the information age, studies like this one are crucial in guiding our path forward, ensuring that 
our public libraries continue to serve as dynamic, responsive, and inclusi ve community hubs. 
 
  

17 
 
   
 
References 
Abrams, S. S., & Van Eck, R. N. (2021). Checked out? videogame programming in U.S. libraries 
and implications for videogame literacies. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 65(3), 
227–236. https://doi.org/10.1002/jaal.1197  
Adams, S. S. (2009). The case for video games in libraries. Library Review, 58(3), 196–202. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/00242530910942045  
ALA GameRT. (2024a). ALA GameRT Twitch Channel . ALA GameRT - Twitch. 
https://www.twitch.tv/alagamert  
ALA GameRT. (2024b). League of Librarian Gamers - ALA GameRT. Facebook. 
https://www.facebook.com/groups/LeagueOfLibrarianGamers/  
ALA GameRT. (2024c). Why have games in libraries? . ALA Games and Gaming Round Table. 
https://games.ala.org/why -have-games-in-libraries/  
American Library Association [ALA]. (2019). Libguides: Library statistics and figures: Number 
of libraries in the United States. Number of Libraries in the United States - Library 
Statistics and Figures - LibGuides at American Library Association. 
https://libguides.ala.org/c.php?g=751692&p=9132142  
Baker, C. J. (2014, December 12). Video games: Their effect on society and how we must 
modernize our pedagogy for students of the digital age  (thesis). VCU Scholars Compass: 
Theses and Dissertations . Virginia Commonwealth University. Retrieved from 
https://scholarscompass.vcu.edu/etd/3627/.  
Biswal, A. (2023, October 11). What is a chi-square test? formula, Examples & Uses: 
Simplilearn. Simplilearn.com. https://www.simplilearn.com/tutorials/statistics -tutorial/chi-
square-test  
Cherry, J. (2023, April 26). What’s behind the rise in popularity of board games?  Cherryflava. 
https://cherryflava.com/whats -behind-the-rise-in-popularity-of-board-games/  
Chief Officers of State Library Agencies [COSLA]. (2024). Cosla Overview . Chief Officers of 
State Library Agencies. https://www.cosla.org/overview  
Elkins, A. J., & Hollister, J. M. (2020). Power up: Games and gaming in library and information 
science curricula in the United States. Journal of Education for Library and Information 
Science, 61(2), 229–252. https://doi.org/10.3138/jelis.2019 -0038.r1  

18 
 
   
 
Entertainment Software Association [ESA]. (2024). 2023 essential facts about the U.S. video 
game industry. The Entertainment Software Association. https://www.theesa.com/2023 -
essential-facts/  
Farber, M. (2021). Gaming sel: Games as transformational to social and emotional learning . 
Peter Lang.  
Florence. (2024, March 6). What percentage of People Play Board games?[board game statistics 
2024]. PlayToday.co. https://playtoday.co/blog/stats/board -games-statistics/  
Forsythe, C. (2021). Game on! recreational play in the library. Emerging Library & Information 
Perspectives, 4(1), 143–156. https://doi.org/10.5206/elip.v4i1.13442  
Gee, J. P. (2008). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy . Palgrave 
Macmillan.  
Goek, S., Jones, K., Clark, L., Drill, K., & Price, J. (2023). 2022 Public Library Services for 
strong communities: Results from the 2022 PLA Survey . American Library Association. 
https://www.ala.org/pla/sites/ala.org.pla/files/content/data/PLA_Services_Survey_Report_
2023.pdf  
Goodridge, M., & Rohweder, M. J. (2022). Librarian’s Guide to games and gamers: From 
collection development to advisory services . Libraries Unlimited, an imprint of ABC-
CLIO, LLC.  
Hill, C. (2016). Play on: The use of games in libraries. The Christian Librarian, 59(1). 
https://doi.org/10.55221/2572 -7478.1157  
Howarth, J. (2024, January 29). How many gamers are there? (new 2024 statistics) . Exploding 
Topics. https://explodingtopics.com/blog/number -of-gamers  
IBM. (n.d.). IBM® SPSS® Statistics. IBM.com. https://www.ibm.com/products/spss -
statistics/gradpack  
Inman Berens, K., & Noorda, R. (2023, November 1). Gen Z and Millennials: How They Use 
Public Libraries and Identify Through Media Use . American Library Association. 
https://www.ala.org/advocacy/sites/ala.org.advocacy/files/content/tools/Gen -Z-and-
Millennials-Report%20(1).pdf  
Lee, V. R., & Phillips, A. L. (2019). Reconceptualizing libraries: Perspectives from the 
information and Learning Sciences . Routledge Taylor & Francis Group.  

19 
 
   
 
Microsoft. (n.d.). Buy Microsoft Excel (PC or Mac): Cost of Excel only or with Microsoft 365 . 
Microsoft Store. https://www.microsoft.com/en -us/microsoft-
365/p/excel/cfq7ttc0hr4r?activetab=pivot%3Aoverviewtab  
Noorda, R., & Inman Berens, K. (2021). Immersive media and books 2020: New insights about 
book pirates, libraries and Discovery, millennials, and cross -media engagement: Before 
and during covid. Publishing Research Quarterly , 37(2), 227–240. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12109 -021-09810-z  
Peiser, J. (2024, December 24). Why board games are quickly regaining popularity - The 
Washington Post. The Washington Post. 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2022/12/24/board -game-popularity/  
Ponto, K., Tredinnick, R., Verbeke, M., Kopp, K., Swanson, L., & Gagnon, D. (2023). Waddle: 
Using Virtual Penguin Embodiment as a vehicle for empathy and informal learning. 29th 
ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology . 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3611659.3617211  
Post, C., Henry, T., Nunnally, K., & Lanham, C. (2023). A colossal catalog adventure: 
Representing Indie Video Games and Game Creators in library catalogs. Cataloging & 
Classification Quarterly, 61(7–8), 792–814. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/01639374.2023.2280207  
Robson, D., Phillips, J., & Guerrero, S. (2018). Don’t just roll the dice: Simple solutions for 
circulating tabletop game collections effectively in your library. Library Resources & 
Technical Services, 62(2), 80. https://doi.org/10.5860/lrts.62n2.80  
Seay, Jared A. (2024). Gaming & Libraries. Jared A Seay - Reference Librarian, Addlestone 
Library. https://blogs.cofc.edu/seayj/gaming -learning-articles/library-gaming/  
Seay, Jared Alexander. (2018a). Considering games and gamification in Libraries & Associated 
Entities — in praise of real people. Against the Grain, 30(5). https://doi.org/10.7771/2380 -
176x.8189  
Seay, Jared Alexander. (2018b). Considering games and gamification in libraries & associated 
entities — surely, you can’t be serious: When library folk go game. Against the Grain, 
30(2). https://doi.org/10.7771/2380 -176x.8063  
Seay, Jared Alexander. (2018c). Considering games and gamification in Libraries & Associated 
Entities — the “g” word. Against the Grain, 30(4). https://doi.org/10.7771/2380 -176x.8311  

20 
 
   
 
Seay, Jared Alexander. (2018d). Considering games and Gamification in libraries & associated 
entities —  how the longing for Tabletops has revitalized games. Against the Grain, 30(3). 
https://doi.org/10.7771/2380 -176x.8268  
Seay, Jared Alexander. (2021a). Considering games in libraries and such — space guardians: 
New Year’s musings of how libraries of old (including but not necessarily old librarians) 
have returned just in time to save us from Digital Anxiety. Against the Grain, 31(1). 
https://doi.org/10.7771/2380 -176x.8378  
Seay, Jared Alexander. (2021b). Considering games in libraries and such — The Ultimate 
Library instruction. Against the Grain, 31(6). https://doi.org/10.7771/2380 -176x.8513  
Seay, Jared Alexander. (2021c). Considering games in libraries and such — a liminal response to 
watching paint dry. Against the Grain, 31(2). https://doi.org/10.7771/2380 -176x.8386  
Seay, Jared Alexander. (2021d). Considering games in libraries and such — on using a game to 
actually teach something. part I: The accidental learner. Against the Grain, 31(5). 
https://doi.org/10.7771/2380 -176x.8501  
Simplilearn. (2024, March 5). What is regression analysis? types: Examples: Uses . 
Simplilearn.com. https://www.simplilearn.com/tutorials/excel -tutorial/regression-analysis  
  
  

21 
 
   
 
Appendix A: Draft of Games-based Library Services Implementation Questionnaire 
(Librarians) 
 
Survey Introduction: Thank you for your willingness to participate in this Games -based Library 
Services Implementation Questionnaire! American libraries’ collective assistance with this study 
will greatly help professionals in the field make informed  and forward-thinking decisions related 
to games-based library services. 
At least one staff member from your library that manages programs and/or collections 
should complete this form; preferably, though, the form would be completed by enough 
appropriate staff at your library to represent  holistic collection and program management that 
would cater to all library user age demographics  across your library space  (most often broken 
down into “children”, “teens”, and “adults”). Participating staff should only fill the form out 
once. 
While completing this questionnaire, i t’s important for library staff to understand what 
exactly “games-based library services” [hereto referred to GBLS] means. For the context of our 
study, “Games-based” means any library experiences/offerings directly centered around modern 
gaming media (including formats like video games, board games, tabletop role -playing games 
[TTRPGS], virtual and augmented reality games [VR and ARGs], and collectible/competitive 
card games). “Library Services” refers to any library offerings intended to be 
utilized/experienced by library patrons (like in -person or virtual programs, circulating 
collections, drop-in/“library use only” collections, informational displays, take -home “passive 
program” kits, giveaways, and more).  
As such, GBLS could be defined as “library experiences/offerings directly centered 
around modern gaming media like video games, board games, TTRPGs, VR and ARGs, 
collectible/competitive card games, and other related contemporary gaming formats.”  Feel free 
to use your best judgement about what these services might entail when considering them in the 
scope of your library’s offerings.  
Ensuring the ethical integrity of our research is of paramount importance.  All responses 
will be anonymous, and no personally identifiable information will be collected. Data will be 
stored securely and only accessible to the research team. Any reports or publications resulting 
from this research will present aggregated data, ens uring individual responses cannot be 
identified. 
If you have any issues/clarifications needed with this questionnaire, or need to alter your 
responses, please contact the study’s Principal Investigator, Chris Baker, at 
Chris.Baker@dpi.wi.gov. Thank you again for your participation!  
 
Survey Questions: 
➢ Library, Community, and Staff Information : 
1. Where is your library located ? 
o State: ________ 

22 
 
   
 
o County: ________ 
o Municipality: ________ 
 
2. What is the population size of your municipality?  
o 0-499 
o 500-4,999 
o 5,000-9,999 
o 10,000-19,999 
o 20,000-49,999 
o 50,000-99,999 
o 100,000+ 
 
3. How would you define your municipality /community? (Select one) 
o Rural 
o Urban 
o Sub-urban 
 
4. What is the size of your library (in square feet ; estimated)? ________ 
 
5. How many staff members does your library have  (in full-time equivalency, or 
FTE)? ________ 
 
6. What is your library’s total annual programming budget (estimated)? 
 
7. What is your library’s total annual budget for collection materials (estimated)?  
 
8. What is your role at your library? (Choose all options that best fit): 
o Staff serving Youth (Children’s/Youth Services Librarian, Library 
Assistant, etc.) 
o Staff serving Teens (Children’s/Youth Services Librarian, Library 
Assistant, etc.) 
o Staff serving Adults (Adult Services Librarian, Library Assistant, etc.)  
o Staff serving all/multiple demographics (Programs or Collections 
Manager, etc.) 
o Library Director 
o Other: ________ 
 
9. Which of the following library services /functions do you develop, facilitate, 
and/or manage? (Choose all that apply): 
o Library materials collections 

23 
 
   
 
o Library programs 
o Library displays 
o Library budgets 
o Community partnership events  
o Other: ________ 
 
➢ Games-based Library Services Implementations: 
1. Does your library currently offer any games-based library services (GBLS)? 
Note: this could mean games-based programs, collections, displays, or any other 
service offerings centered around modern game types  (listed above). 
o Yes 
o No 
▪ If no, skip to question #9 
 
2. If yes, what formats of GBLS does your library offer , and in what way? (Multiple 
choice; select all that apply):  
o Video games 
▪ Collections for checkout 
▪ Items for in-library usage 
▪ In-person programs 
▪ Virtual programs 
▪ Displays 
 
o Board games 
▪ Collections for checkout 
▪ Items for in-library usage 
▪ In-person programs 
▪ Virtual programs 
▪ Displays 
 
o Tabletop Role-playing Games 
▪ Collections for checkout 
▪ Items for in-library usage 
▪ In-person programs 
▪ Virtual programs 
▪ Displays 
 
o Virtual and/or Augmented Reality Technologies 
▪ Collections for checkout 
▪ Items for in-library usage 

24 
 
   
 
▪ In-person programs 
▪ Virtual programs 
▪ Displays 
 
o Collectible/competitive card games  
▪ Collections for checkout 
▪ Items for in-library usage 
▪ In-person programs 
▪ Virtual programs 
▪ Displays 
 
o Other (Please describe): ________  
 
3. If your library offers games -based programs, how often are they offered? 
o Weekly 
o Monthly  
o Only occasionally throughout the year 
 
4. Approximately how much does your library spend on games -based collections for 
either checkout or in-library use (leave blank if none)? $ ________ 
 
5. Approximately how much does your library spend on either virtual or in-person 
games-based programs (leave blank if none)? $ ________ 
 
6. How does your library fund GBLS? (Select all the apply) :  
o Annual library operating budget 
o Funding from support organization ( Friends group, Foundation, etc.) 
o Grants and/or occasional donations 
o Other: ________ 
 
7. How does your library promote GBLS to patrons ? (Check all that apply): 
o In-library posters or posters in the community  
o Library displays 
o On our website 
o On social media 
o Through word of mouth at the library 
o We do not promote our GBLS to patrons  
 
8. How popular would you say your GBLS are with your patrons?  
o Likert scale: Not popular at all – Extremely popular 

25 
 
   
 
9. Why do you not offer GBLS, or what challenges (if any) has your library faced in 
implementing GBLS or offering more GBLS? (Choose all options that best fit 
your experience; leave blank if none): 
o We haven’t offered them yet, but now intend to  
o Games are too expensive 
o I feel like I don’t know enough about games to integrate GBLS  
o I don’t have the time/capacity to integrate GBLS  on top of everything else 
o I’m worried that games-based services will not be popular in the future  
o I don’t think my community cares about games -based services 
o Libraries shouldn’t offer games  
o I think games might be unhealthy for people  
o Other: ________ 
 
10. How important do you think it is for the national field of libraries to offer GBLS ?  
o Likert scale: Not important at all – Very important 
11. How personally prepared do you feel to implement, manage, and promote GBLS?  
o Likert scale: Not at all prepared – Very prepared 
12. If you received professional library education (like a library degree or a library 
major at a University), or are currently receiving professional library education, 
have you studied any professional games-based library services in your classes? If 
yes, please indicate what type (s) (choose all that apply): 
o Yes 
▪ Games-based collection development training  
▪ Games-based collection maintenance training  
▪ Games-based program development /promotion training 
▪ Research about games-based library services 
▪ Information/research about the pervasiveness/popularity of games  
▪ Other: ________ 
o No / Not applicable 
o I don’t remember 
 
13. How important do you think it is for modern library training /education programs 
to teach about GBLS?  
o Likert scale: Not important at all – Very important 
14. What resources or training would help you feel more prepared to offer GBLS ? 
(Check all that apply): 
o Virtual webinars, training videos, or webinar/video series  
o In-person conferences or workshops about GBLS  

26 
 
   
 
o Digital/analog “toolkits” with ready -to-use resources (posters, social 
media templates, etc.) 
o Guidelines/steps/tips for offering  and maintaining games-based programs 
and/or library collections 
o Grants or other funding opportunities to support GBLS  
o I don’t need any resources/training related to GBLS 
o Other: ________ 
 
  

27 
 
   
 
Appendix B: Draft of Games-based Library Services Needs Assessment Survey  
(Patrons) 
 
Survey Introduction:  Thank you, library user, for your willingness to participate in this “Games-
based Library Services Needs Assessment Survey ”! In filling out this survey, you’ll be 
contributing to better national understanding of how library users feel about games -based library 
services. If you are aware of other people in your community that might be interested in 
participating in this survey, please share the survey link with them.  
Note that participants younger than 18 should get permission  from a parent or legal 
guardian before filling out this survey; additionally, participants aged 11 or younger should only 
fill this out with direct assistance from a parent or legal guardian.  Note that participants should 
only fill the form out once. 
While completing this questionnaire, i t’s important to understand what exactly we mean 
when we say “games-based library services” [hereto referred to GBLS] . For the context of our 
study, “Games-based” means any library experiences/offerings directly centered around modern 
gaming media (including formats like video games, board games, tabletop role -playing games 
[TTRPGS], virtual and augmented reality games [VR and ARGs], and collectible/competitive 
card games). “Library Services” refers to any library offerings intended to be 
utilized/experienced by library users (like in-person or virtual programs, circulating collections, 
drop-in/“library use only” collections, informational displays, take -home “passive program” kits, 
giveaways, and more). 
As such, GBLS could be defined as “library experiences/offerings directly centered 
around modern gaming media like video games, board games, TTRPGs, VR and ARGs, 
collectible/competitive card games, and other related contemporary gaming formats.”  Feel free 
to use your best judgement about what these services might entail when considering them in the 
scope of this survey. 
Ensuring the ethical integrity of our research is of paramount importance.  All responses 
will be anonymous, and no personally identifiable information will be collected. Data will be 
stored securely and only accessible to the research team. Any reports or publications resulting 
from this research will present aggregated data, ens uring individual responses cannot be 
identified. 
If you have any issues/clarifications needed with this survey, any concerns, or need to 
alter your responses, please contact the study’s Principal Investigator, Chris Baker, at 
Chris.Baker@dpi.wi.gov. Thank you again for your participation!  
 
Survey Questions: 
➢ Demographics and Library Usage 
1. What age range do you belong to? 
o 0-8 
o 8-11 

28 
 
   
 
o 12-18 
o 18-35 
o 35-50 
o 50-65+ 
 
2. What is your highest level of education?  
o Pre-K or Kindergarten 
o Grade School 
o Middle School 
o High School/GED 
o College/Trade School 
o Master’s Degree/PhD 
 
3. What is your gender identity ? 
o Male 
o Female 
o Nonbinary 
o Other: ________ 
o Prefer not to answer 
 
4. Which of the following options best describes how frequently you use your 
library? 
o Daily 
o 2-5 times a week 
o Once a week or so 
o Once or twice a month 
o Occasionally throughout the year, but not frequently  
 
5. What do you use your library for? (Check all that apply): 
o Checking out materials 
o Attending library programs 
o As a place to hang out or socialize 
o To get help from library staff with something 
o To use the free wi-fi and/or computers 
o Other: ________ 
 
➢ Usage/Interest/Knowledge  of Modern Gaming and Libraries: 
1. What types of Modern Gaming interest you? (Check all that apply): 
o Video games 
o Board games 

29 
 
   
 
o Tabletop Role-playing Games 
o Virtual Reality 
o Augmented Reality Games  
o Collectible/competitive card games  
o Other: ___________ 
o None 
 
2. Does the library you use offer any Games-based library services (GBLS)?; Note: 
this could mean games -based programs, collections, displays, or any other 
service offerings centered around modern game types (listed above).  
o Yes 
o No 
o I don’t know 
 
3. Have you ever participated in  or used any GBLS at your library?  
o Yes 
o No 
 
4. If yes, which types of GBLS have you utilized/participated in? (Check all that 
apply): 
o Checked out games-based materials 
o Attended games-based programs 
o Participated in gaming competitions  
o In-library drop-in games offerings (board games, video games, etc.) 
o Viewed displays and/or educational information posted about gaming  
o Attended virtual webinars and meetings about games  
o Other: __________ 
o None 
 
5. What formats of GBLS have you utilized/participated in? (Check all that apply): 
o Video games 
o Board games 
o Tabletop Role-playing Games 
o Virtual Reality 
o Augmented Reality Games 
o Collectible/competitive card games  
o Other: ___________ 
o None 
 

30 
 
   
 
6. If your library does offer GBLS, do you feel they do an adequate job of promoting 
them? 
o Yes 
o No 
o I don’t know 
 
7. Do you wish that your library offered more GBLS?  
o Yes 
o No 
o I don’t care/I’m not interested in GBLS 
 
8. If yes, what types of GBLS do you wish your library offered more of?  
o Programs centered around gaming  
o Gaming competitions 
o Game collections for checkout 
o In-library usage games 
o Displays and educational information about gaming  
o Virtual webinars and meetings about games  
 
9. If your library was to offer more GBLS, what types of games would you like them 
to focus on/include? Check all that apply. 
o Video games 
o Board games 
o Tabletop Role-playing Games 
o Virtual Reality 
o Augmented Reality Games 
o Collectible/competitive card games  
o Other: ___________ 
 
10. How important do you feel it is for your library to offer GBLS?  
o Likert scale:  
❖ Not at all important – Very important 
 
11. How interested are you in participating in future GBLS at your library?  
o Likert scale:  
❖ Not at all interested – Very interested 
