New Review of Academic Librarianship, 21:129–145, 2015 Published with license by Taylor & Francis ISSN: 1361-4533 print / 1740-7834 online DOI: 10.1080/13614533.2015.1043467
The Protean Challenge of Game Collections at Academic Libraries
EMMA CROSS
MacOdrum Library, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
DAVID MOULD
School of Computer Science, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
ROBERT SMITH
MacOdrum Library, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
The rise of game development and game studies on university campuses prompts academic libraries to consider how to support teaching and research in this area. This article examines current issues and challenges in the development of game collections at academic libraries. The gaming ecosystem has become more complex and libraries may need to move beyond collections largely based on console video games. This article will advance the discussion by considering emerging issues to support access to the full range of games. The article will use examples from Carleton University Library, Ottawa, which has been developing a game collection since 2008.
KEYWORDS academic libraries, games, video games
INTRODUCTION
Academic libraries support the teaching and research needs of the University and must adjust collections and services in response to new developments. This process can push academic libraries to look beyond traditional books and journals; the rise of game development and game studies on university campuses provides a timely example. This article will examine current issues and challenges in the development of game collections at academic
© Emma Cross, David Mould, and Robert Smith Address correspondence to Emma Cross, MacOdrum Library, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada. E-mail: emma.cross@carleton.ca Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in the article can be found online at www.tandfonline.com/racl.
129

130

E. Cross et al.

libraries. Game collections have been discussed by a number of inﬂuential articles published in the mid to late 2000s (see Kane, Soehner and Wei 2007; Laskowski and Ward 2009; Smith 2008; Tappeiner and Lyons 2008); at that time the discussion centered on game collections based on console video games, which were then largely new to academic libraries. However, the gaming ecosystem has become more complex in recent years. This article seeks to further the discussion by considering emerging issues in developing game collections. We will use examples from Carleton University Library, Ottawa, Canada, which has been developing a game collection since 2008.

Discussion of Games
Broadly speaking, academic libraries might want to incorporate three types of games into their collections: board games, console games, and PC games. Board games are traditional tabletop games, such as Monopoly and Settlers of Catan. Console games are video games played on a dedicated gaming console such as the PlayStation or Xbox. PC games are video games played on a personal computer. These last two categories overlap a great deal, but there are signiﬁcant content and practical differences and hence our discussion separates them.

Board Games
Recent years have seen an explosion in board game publishing. Board games are strikingly diverse in terms of the themes and mechanics they employ; because of the lower costs to bring a board game to market, compared with a computer game, board games can take greater design risks. For aspiring game designers, contact with the density of ideas in a board game collection can be invaluable.
Game development is, in part, about designing game mechanics. Board games are unmatched in their ability to demonstrate the underlying structure of a game: the rules are presented directly to the players, for example, as a short booklet, and can be readily isolated and analyzed. In contrast, it is much more difﬁcult to extract the rules from a game instantiated in software. Furthermore, the rules of a board game must be understood by players, since the players are responsible for adjudicating play; this means that the rules have to be reasonably simple. Computer games are refereed by the computer and can involve extremely complex calculations.

Console Games
Video games published for use on dedicated hardware such as the PS4 and Xbox One make up the majority of the Carleton game collection. Console

Game Collections at Academic Libraries

131

games are easy to shelve and circulate: the media are small and portable. High-production-value games dominate. Most console games are so-called AAA titles, with production costs usually in the range of $10–$20 million, and potentially much more: Bungie’s recent title Destiny was projected to cost up to $140 million to develop. Many library patrons will be primarily interested in borrowing console games, both for academic pursuits and for leisure.

PC Games and a Dedicated Gaming Lab
Personal computers occupy a middle ground between board games and consoles in terms of ease of development and distribution of games. So-called “indie” games, made and published by small “independent” companies, have proliferated; some, like Minecraft, have become household names. Indie titles are generally not available on consoles, experiments such as the Xbox Live Arcade notwithstanding.
Indie games share with board games an experimental vibrancy, less commonly seen in the large-scale commercial games available for consoles. Indie games are generally made by small teams or individuals, and can sometimes serve as political or artistic statements, as Hotline Miami or Dear Esther did. In consequence, indie games are of interest to academics in both game studies and game development: in game studies, because the games embody rich texts to decode, and in game development, because they serve as design examples and aspirational games more plausibly realizable as a student project than are AAA games.
Historically, PC games have suffered from piracy, spurring publishers to encumber their games with ever more intrusive copy protection schemes; such efforts are generally known as digital rights management (DRM). While the media for console games can be loaned and resold, PC games are generally sold on the basis of a non-transferable license agreement. Installing and playing the game can require use of a one-time activation code, or other form of permanently registering the game to its licensee. Under this framework, it is impossible to lend PC games to library patrons: the ﬁrst borrower would activate the game, rendering it unusable by later borrowers. The ubiquity of DRM would seem to make the standard borrowing model infeasible for PC games. However, other models are possible. Our library has opted to make PC games available through a dedicated gaming lab: patrons cannot borrow games, but can book time on the stations and play available games there.

Other Games—Mobile Games, MMOs
Board, console, and PC games are not the only types of games available. Notably omitted from the list are mobile games (games played on a mo-

132

E. Cross et al.

TABLE 1 Composition of the Carleton University Library Games Collection as of December 31, 2014

Board games

119

Console video games

550

PC games (available via Steam in the Library’s gaming lab)

142

bile device, typically a smartphone). Such games are often free to play; others are paid for by subscription. Mobile games are directly downloaded to the mobile device from the publisher or from a third-party site. The ecosystem around mobile games does not seem amenable to archiving and distributing games through the library. Libraries might also want to support MMOs, “massively multiplayer online” games such as World of Warcraft. MMO games represent an important part of the game industry but there are barriers to making these games accessible through the library. Potential legal issues make naive lending problematic; the standard license agreement for MMOs allows only a single user. Further, MMOs are intended to be played by a single user over a period of many weeks, months, or even years; a player’s position develops slowly over a long period of time. Although there are no serious technical issues to maintaining a library subscription to an MMO (legal issues are another matter), it is not clear that the library’s patrons would beneﬁt from shared, short-term access to a game of this type.

Carleton University Library Game Collection
In Summer 2008 the Library was approached by faculty with a request to purchase games to support courses in game development. A committee was formed and delivered its ﬁnal report in early 2009, including a request for funding from the University. The committee obtained start-up funding, games were added to the Library’s collection proﬁle, and funding for the game collection is now a regular part of the collections budget. Carleton University strategic plans from 2008–18 included emphasis on new digital media and immersive learning such that the environment was conducive to the establishment of the Library’s game collection.
Between 2011 and 2013, the Library was extensively renovated which included building the new Discovery Centre (Discovery Centre for

TABLE 2 Total Circulation for Board Games and Console Video Games for the Period May 1, 2013 to April 30, 2014

Board games Console games

521 1,645

Game Collections at Academic Libraries

133

TABLE 3 All-time Top 5 Circulating Board Games as of December 4, 2014

Title

Total checkouts

Small world: it’s a world of slaughter after all

46

The game of life

45

Dominion

37

Chess

36

Risk 2210 A.D.: the game of global domination and beyond

36

Undergraduate Research and Engagement 2015) to facilitate collaborative and interactive learning. The new space includes a high-tech nontraditional classroom, a multimedia lab with 18 × 5 projector screen, and a gaming lab. Carleton University Library has developed a sizable collection of board games, console games, and PC games which are further described in Tables 1–4 and Figures 1 and 2. The Library crowd-sourced development of the game collection, actively seeking input from faculty, students, and Library staff. Use patterns (see Figures 3 and 4) indicate that circulation of board games and video games is distributed across the collection.

Beneﬁts of Developing a Game Collection
There are a number of signiﬁcant beneﬁts for developing a game collection for an academic library including its ability to support related programs, its ability to foster innovation in teaching beyond game studies and game development, and increased morale among library staff. We discuss these in subsequent sections.

Support for Faculty Working in Game Development and Game Studies
The main reason to collect games is to support teaching and research in game development and game studies. Game development is the art and science of making games, including both technical and design elements. Students beneﬁt from seeing numerous examples of successful designs, and speciﬁc

TABLE 4 All-time Top 5 Circulating Console Games as of December 4, 2014

Title

Platform

Total checkouts

Assassin’s creed II

PS3

51

Red dead redemption

PS3

50

Battleﬁeld: bad company 2

PS3

50

Batman: Arkham Asylum

PS3

50

Super Mario galaxy

Wii

50

134

E. Cross et al.

FIGURE 1 Console game collection and titles by platform as of December 31, 2014. The Library collects in 4 platforms: 1) PlayStation (PlayStation, PS2, PS3, PS4, and PlayStation Vita); 2) Xbox (Xbox, Xbox 360, Xbox Kinect, and Xbox One); 3) Wii (Wii and Wii U); and 4) Misc (includes PC games on disc, noncommercial games such as serious games, studentcreated games, and miscellaneous other games).
games can be presented as exemplars from which effective design patterns can be abstracted. Faculty may wish to propose a “game canon” as a basis for discussion, listing several important and inﬂuential games; a game collection in the library can ensure that all students have access to the full canon.1 Game studies involves treating games as texts to be studied, analogous to ﬁlm studies or literary studies. As the games themselves are the objects of study, scholars need to have access to the games.
In the years before the Carleton Library began to collect games, faculty working in game studies and game development tried to store and distribute games in their ofﬁces and labs. Though ad-hoc practices persist, the Library’s collection means that students can access course and research materials on standard terms.

FIGURE 2 Circulation of console game collection by platform (May 1, 2013 to April 30, 2014).

Game Collections at Academic Libraries

135

FIGURE 3 Distributed circulation of console games for the period May 1, 2013 to April 30, 2014. Circulation of 407 console games out of 494 total collection as of April 30, 2014.
Support for Teaching and Learning Outside Game Development and Game Studies
The game collection at Carleton University began as a small specialist collection created for game development courses in the School of Computer Science and the School of Information Technology. As the collection and the gaming lab have grown, games are starting to be used by courses across disciplines. This has led to some innovative teaching and learning, discussed in the following paragraphs.
A third year undergraduate course in history, Video games and simulation for historians, taught by Dr. Shawn Graham has made frequent use of the Library gaming lab including PC games and Minecraft to observe, identify, and create historical thinking in games in the context of digital history.

FIGURE 4 Distributed circulation of board games for the period May 1, 2013 to April 30, 2014. Circulation of 85 board games out of 91 total collection as of April 30, 2014.

136

E. Cross et al.

Gender and gaming, a third year undergraduate course in Women’s Studies taught by Dr. Jessica Aldred, examines how digital games, their creators, and the various gamer cultures that surround them have often struggled to create gender and sexuality-inclusive spaces and characters. In order to fully understand this struggle, Dr. Aldred requires students to play and closely analyze the wide range of digital game texts, some of which are emblematic of current limits of representation and inclusion in games, and others which point to more hopeful possibilities for the future.
In the next decade, as new faculty enter universities, they will want to include games in their curricula. Academic libraries need to be prepared for these requests.
The gaming lab has also been utilized at various events which have provided positive publicity for the Library. The most recent was the Library GIS Day (MacOdrum Library 2014) when participants from across campus and the local community experimented with two Oculus Rift headsets to view geographical data in Minecraft, Euro truck simulator 2 and other games.
The design, set-up and operation of the Library gaming lab has provided a welcome opportunity for Library staff to collaborate with faculty and computing services. Regular meetings with faculty, Library staff and computing services staff facilitate discussion of issues such as purchase and storage of gaming equipment, design and usage of lab space, collection development, workshops and special events to support teaching and learning with games. Collaboration has also expanded to include consultation with the local public library system which has been collecting video games for years. Colleagues at the gaming lab at McMaster University have also shared tips and best practice ideas (McMaster University 2015).

Increased Morale and Teamwork for Library Staff
Another beneﬁt discovered while developing the game collection at Carleton was that it boosted morale and teamwork for Library staff. The game collection, especially the board games, was enthusiastically embraced by Library staff and spawned the creation of the Library games club where Library staff enjoy learning new board games and spending time together in an informal and fun social atmosphere. This same phenomenon has been described by Leeder (2014) at the College of Western Idaho Library which also has a game collection.
Enthusiasm for the game collection has also generated professional beneﬁts for the Library. For example, a team of Library staff presented a “Board game zone” as an “unconference” session at the Ontario Library Association conference in January 2015 to promote the value of games in library collections. Thus, there are advantages to being an early adopter in an emerging ﬁeld including the development of “human capital” in staff trained to provide an innovative new Library service.

Game Collections at Academic Libraries

137

ISSUES AND CHALLENGES

New collections bring challenges for academic libraries. Developing a game collection involves experimentation; not everything will work smoothly. Some common challenges and pitfalls include threats of censorship; internal resistance from within the library; the need for a coherent collection policy aware of the diversity of games; and technical and logistical issues around purchasing, preserving, and circulating games.

Censorship of Video Games
Censorship of video games is an ongoing issue in academic libraries, which operate in a campus culture sensitive to issues of gender and violence (Laskowski and Ward 2009, 269). Video games can produce strong reactions; people argue that video games depict graphic violence and promote negative stereotypes of women, and hence do not belong in a university library. Carleton University Library had a direct experience with censorship in Fall 2011 when the Library added Rage to the collection. Rage was the Library’s 300th game; the milestone was advertised on the Library website to promote the growth of the video game collection. Within days, the Library received a number of complaints about the game from faculty who asked that Rage be removed from the collection. Two faculty members complained that the game exposed students to dangerous and insidious representations of militaristic violence and aggressive masculinity. One faculty member further added they were raising concerns as part of a wider struggle to make the university a safe space for everyone. They had also watched the trailer for Rage and found it chilling and disturbing.
Complaints were forwarded to the Associate University Librarian (Collections) who reviewed the concerns and corresponded with the complainants. The issue produced vigorous discussion. The title had been purchased for academic reasons: game studies researchers were interested because Rage marked the return of John Carmack, maker of DOOM, to game development; game development students were interested to see the effectiveness of the id Tech 5 engine and its new technology for streaming very-high-resolution textures (see Figure 5). Requests to remove the title were declined. The Library responded that while the game contains images which may be considered offensive by some, the University relies on the professional judgment of library subject specialists and faculty to acquire library materials which support teaching and research. Furthermore, academic libraries cannot select or censor materials based on potential to cause offence.
The experience prompted the Library to review its challenged materials policy, which had been languishing as an internal Library document. The policy was reviewed, amended, passed through the relevant library committees,

138

E. Cross et al.

FIGURE 5 Screenshot from Rage (PC version). © David Mould. Reproduced by permission of David Mould. Permission to reuse must be obtained from the rightsholder.
and is now posted in the Library website (MacOdrum Library 2015). Furthermore, the experience strengthened the Library’s commitment to academic freedom on campus and has resulted in an article in Canada’s national Freedom to Read Week magazine for 2015 (Attridge-Bufton and Jones 2014).
Censorship will continue to be an issue for academic libraries collecting video games. Libraries require institutional support and collections policies to effectively address challenges. Without these measures in place, libraries risk removal of titles and further acquisitions could be slowed or halted. Under such circumstances, it would be difﬁcult to effectively build a collection or

FIGURE 6 Examples of student-created games. Nautilus by Joshua DeGagne et al. and Endless Nebula by Terrence Anderson and William Fleurant from the School of Computer Science, Carleton University. © David Mould. Reproduced by permission of David Mould. Permission to reuse must be obtained from the rightsholder.

Game Collections at Academic Libraries

139

a working relationship with faculty. The heated debate about video games will continue, but it should not undermine the work of academic libraries to support teaching and research in this ﬁeld.
Internal Resistance
Academic libraries can also face internal resistance to games from library staff who do not see the value of games in the collections or are unaware of how games are used in research and teaching. Resistance can manifest in many forms. At Carleton University Library, issues were raised about the cost of games and the content of Mature rated console games. The most serious ﬂashpoint for dissent was the issue of game accessories. MarioKart steering wheels, Wii balance boards, Dance, Dance Revolution mats, and Rock Band instruments became a barrier to collecting games when claims were made that the accessories were too cumbersome to store, shelve, and circulate. Additional concerns were raised that gaming accessories were unhygienic and should not be circulated. Debate continued for a number of months and culminated at a Library Collections Committee meeting in Spring 2013, which included a letter of support from four faculty working in game development. The Committee decided to fully support the game collection: sidelining or removing Library materials bought to support courses would create a worrying precedent. Despite the Library holding an information meeting for all staff about the use of games in university courses and thorough discussion of games in the Library Collections Committee, it appears that some resistance was unavoidable. Again, an updated challenged materials policy and support from senior management can help address issues as soon as they start. Also, ongoing Library events to promote gaming can educate staff on how games are used in research and teaching and can help reassure Library staff that these non-traditional materials do indeed belong in a university library.

Collection Development Policy
Gaming is a diverse ﬁeld with a wide variety of purchasing options and there are many issues to consider when developing a collection development policy for games. Decisions need to be made at the outset so the collection and budget are not spread too thin. Which types of games should the collection include? Board games, console games, and PC games are not the only types of games available. Issues around collecting other games including mobile games and MMOs were discussed earlier.
CONSOLE GAMES
The case for collecting console games is simple: they are easy to circulate and have high production values, making them the most popular choice for

140

E. Cross et al.

libraries; that said, there are a few pitfalls with collecting console games. Console games run on dedicated hardware, and a given item can only be used by patrons with access to the corresponding console. It is possible to improve access by loaning consoles as well as games; Carleton has so far eschewed this path, but other libraries might decide differently. Even granting that many or most patrons will have a console of some type, the library must decide on a game-by-game basis which consoles to support. Some games are available only on a single console type (so-called “exclusive” games, such as The Last of Us). Others are available on multiple consoles; one of the library’s earliest acquisitions, Bully (2006), was available on Xbox 360, PlayStation 2, and Nintendo Wii. With limited funds, the library must make tradeoffs between supporting multiple consoles for a single game vs. purchasing more new titles. The recent entry of the PS4 and Xbox One complicate matters: the newer consoles represent better technology, but do not yet have a large install base, so games purchased for these consoles will not be usable by many patrons yet.

ENSURING COLLECTION DIVERSITY
As discussed, there are valid reasons to expand a game collection beyond only console games. To simplify acquisition and installation of the PC games, libraries can use the digital distribution service Steam. Steam has an enormous catalog of games (approximately 4200 as of January 2015) and provides a single point of contact for downloading and installing games. Carleton has used Steam to acquire over 140 games; while Steam sells AAA games as well, our approximate policy is to get AAA games on console, and use Steam to get games not available on consoles.

DIGITAL RIGHTS MANAGEMENT (DRM) AND DOWNLOADABLE CONTENT (DLC)
DRM and DLC will be part of the evolution of games and academic libraries should pause to consider whether and how they can support these developments. Even console games are affected. For example, the game NBA2K14 “super fan pack” (containing NBA2K14 for both Xbox One and Xbox 360) is sold in console game packaging but does not contain the game, which must be downloaded from Xbox Live. Downloaded games are not transferable, and, therefore, games distributed in this manner are unsuitable for circulation; in our case, we installed it in the Library gaming lab. The potential for future developments around DRM and DLC suggests that academic libraries may need to consider offering the services of a gaming lab to support access to a full range of games. Labs have not traditionally been provided by academic libraries; we will revisit this issue later.

Game Collections at Academic Libraries

141

PRESERVATION
Finally, libraries have to consider challenges of preservation. Gaming hardware changes, with newer consoles incompatible with older ones: the PS4 does not run PS3 games, for example. Overreliance on Steam is risky; there is no guarantee that the service is going to be around forever, and if Steam is discontinued, games purchased through Steam may not remain available. While Steam is the largest digital distributor, alternatives such as GOG (Good Old Games 2015) also provide digital delivery; GOG has a much smaller catalog, but has advantages such as providing DRM-free downloads. Libraries should consider issues around the preservation of games as they would with any other digital object. Software emulation of older hardware is a possibility; projects such as MAME (the Multiple Arcade Machine Emulator) allow games from old consoles and arcade cabinets to be played on modern PCs. Efforts at open access preservation need not be linked with any particular library. For example, Internet Archive has recently added “Internet Arcade” with over 600 free-to-play browser-ready arcade games from the 1970s to 1990 emulated in JSMAME (Internet Archive 2015).
The Library also actively solicits and collects student-created games both for collection development and preservation of student-created research. Student-created games are currently stored on disc and efforts are underway to add these games to the Library’s institutional repository on a consistent basis.

Traditional Library Functions with a Non-traditional Library Collection
Video games and board games are non-traditional materials for an academic library; customary library functions such as acquisitions, cataloguing, processing, shelving, and circulation can present challenges. This topic has already been thoroughly discussed in earlier articles (see Robson and Durkee 2012; Kane, Soehner and Wei 2007). However, there are a number of issues newly arising from the continued growth and diversity of game collections.
It can be difﬁcult to ﬁnd library suppliers who handle games effectively. Fortunately, purchasing board games and video games from amazon.ca has worked very well at Carleton, supplemented with purchases from specialist websites (See Boardgames4us 2015) and local stores. In addition, the Library has established a credit card for the Library gaming lab, needed to purchase Xbox Live Gold and PlayStation Plus subscriptions to access DLC for an increasing number of video games. The credit card can also purchase Wii U games from the Nintendo eStore.
With an increasing number of libraries collecting video games, it is becoming easier to ﬁnd MARC records for copy cataloguing. It has been difﬁcult for libraries to ﬁnd information on cataloguing video games with Resource Description and Access (RDA).2 However, the Online Audiovisual

142

E. Cross et al.

Catalogers Inc., Cataloguing Policy Committee, Video Games Best Practices Task Force is currently working on a best practices guide for cataloging video games.3 In November 2014, the Task Force also submitted a proposal to the Library of Congress for a new RDA relationship designator for video games, “video game developer.”
Processing, shelving, and circulating console games has been discussed in the literature (see Bridges, Hussong, and Mellinger 2008) and can be handled in a similar manner to DVDs. Security is an additional concern for console games as these titles are frequently in high demand. Console games often have a high rate of missing items which are billed to the patron. Libraries can conduct regular reviews of missing and billed titles to keep track of the collection and order replacements when necessary to keep the material accessible for students and faculty. Libraries can also review policies and fees for lost material: libraries with a low ﬂat fee for replacements can ﬁnd they are acting as a de facto game distribution service as students may prefer to pay the replacement fee instead of purchasing their own copy. Older console games may also increase in value; replacement fees should cover the cost of ﬁnding new copies. As library collections of console games mature, replacing console game titles is an ongoing concern. It is often difﬁcult to ﬁnd older titles. In some cases, the original game had bugs or ﬁxes which have academic value for game development students and it is a loss for the library if a replacement copy cannot replicate this content. Sometimes, secondhand markets are the only recourse. Despite security issues, libraries should endeavor to make console games browsable and accessible. Generally, an empty container on the shelf with the disc and manual behind a service desk could be considered best practice.
Board games provide their own set of challenges. They can be timeconsuming to prepare for circulation, be physically awkward to shelve, and missing pieces can be an issue as contents are too numerous to be checked when board games are returned to the Library. Often libraries do not know there is something missing from a board game until a patron reports it. Fortunately, libraries can order replacement copies; old board games are easier to ﬁnd than old console games.
Chadwell (2011, 199) notes the concern many libraries have regarding the additional workload that games place on technical services staff. She suggests that although efﬁciency is a valid concern “such arguments may be specious if not shortsighted.” A signiﬁcant amount of work has been outsourced from technical services departments in academic libraries including shelf ready cataloguing and demand driven acquisition programs4 (see for example Davis, Jin, Neely, and Rykse 2012). “So theoretically, the transformation of collections services means that staff can be available to work on specialized collections programs and services that might satisfy user’s de-

Game Collections at Academic Libraries

143

mands better – programs and services like the introduction of games and gaming into the academic library” (Chadwell 2011, 199).

Gaming Lab in the Context of Academic Library
University libraries started collecting video games in the late 1990s and 2000s, building collections largely based on console games. The gaming ecosystem has become more complex in recent years and it is likely that an academic library collecting video games will, at some point, consider offering a gaming lab to support access to the full range of video games (see also Robson and Durkee 2012, 83). Setting up a gaming lab in a library setting is a complex project; both practical and philosophical issues should be considered.
PRACTICAL
The stafﬁng requirements for a gaming lab should not be underestimated. The service cannot run effectively without qualiﬁed computing services staff being on hand to resolve technical problems and keep the equipment functioning and secure. Additional staff support is required to handle room bookings, create documentation such as acceptable use policies, provide instructions for using the equipment, monitor the room, and handle inappropriate use. Without dedicated and highly skilled staff, the services provided in a library gaming lab will not be accessible to library patrons.
PHILOSOPHICAL
Offering a gaming lab in a library setting requires embracing the idea of lab as a dynamic space for learning and experimentation, not a static provision of service. Implicit in this idea is the concept of risk: game play cannot be controlled, may get rowdy or be offensive to some people or (as previously mentioned) despite ongoing maintenance may not always work as intended. Despite the expense and demands involved, a gaming lab provides the venue for some remarkable learning opportunities for students, examples of which were discussed earlier in the article.

CONCLUSION
Games are non-traditional resources for an academic library collection and controversy usually accompanies the purchase of this material. However, the role of an academic library is to support the teaching and research at the university. Enrolment in game development and game studies courses

144

E. Cross et al.

continues to rise and supporting these ﬁelds, although challenging, can have numerous beneﬁts.
As discussed, challenges include stretching a ﬁnite library budget; unfavorable reactions from faculty and library staff who may not understand how games are utilized in course curricula; collection development in a complex gaming ecosystem with a myriad of purchasing options; and challenges such as DLC, DRM, and preservation.
However challenging it is to support a new and specialized collection, doing so opens academic libraries to a wealth of new opportunities. The library is placed at the leading edge of a current development in higher education, and is seen as proactive with an elevated proﬁle in the university community. New collections also provide marketing opportunities and increased interest in library services. These developments also provide favorable circumstances for the library to collaborate in teaching and research by supporting faculty and students in emerging disciplines with new professional opportunities for library staff to provide an innovative service. Finally, developing a new and specialized collection such as games involves an element of risk, which is unfamiliar territory for many academic libraries, but it is accompanied by a welcome opportunity to reinvigorate library operations.

NOTES

1. In Fall 2014, there were a total of 444 full time students registered in game development courses at Carleton University in the School of Computer Science and the School of Information Technology. See Figure 6 for examples of student-created games.
2. Resource Description and Access (RDA) is the current standard for descriptive library cataloguing adopted by national libraries including the Library of Congress and Library and Archives Canada from April 2013. See http://www.rdatoolkit.org
3. Online Audiovisual Catalogers Inc. (OLAC), Cataloguing Policy Committee, Video Games Best Practices Task Force. “Best practices for cataloging video games using RDA and MARC 21,” to be released in 2015. For further information see the OLAC website http://www.olacinc.org/drupal/
4. Demand driven acquisition (DDA) refers to the purchase of library materials based on selection by patrons in the catalogue.
REFERENCES

Attridge-Bufton, Martha, and Wayne Jones. “Censorship and the Academic Library:
Sex, Violence and Video Games.” Freedom to Read Week 31 (2015): 26–27. Web. 26 Apr. 2015. <http://www.freedomtoread.ca/wordpress/wp-content/ uploads/kit2015.pdf>. Boardgames4us: delivering fun back to your home. Web. 8 Jan. 2015. <www. boardgames4us.ca>.
Bridges, Laurie, Uta Hussong, and Margaret Mellinger. Circulating Video Game
Collections in the Academic Library. Corvallis, OR: Oregon State University Libraries, 2008. Web. 8 Jan. 2015. < http://ir.library.oregonstate.edu/xmlui/hand le/1957/17111>.

Game Collections at Academic Libraries

145

Chadwell, Faye A. “What’s Next for Collection Management and Managers? Games and Gaming in Academic Libraries.” Collection Management 36.4 (2011): 198–202. Print.
Davis, Kate, Lei Jin, Colleen Neely, and Harriet Rykse. “Shared Patron-driven Acquisition within a Consortium: The OCUL PDA Pilot.” Serials Review 38.3 (2012): 183–187. Print.
Discovery Centre for Undergraduate Research and Engagement. Carleton University. Web. 7 Jan. 2015. <http://carleton.ca/discoverycentre>.
Good Old Games. Web. 7 Jan. 2015. <http://www.gog.com>. Internet Archive. Internet Arcade. Web. 7 Jan. 2015. <https://archive.org/
details/internetarcade>. Kane, Danielle, Catherine Soehner, and Wei Wei. “Building a Collection of Video
Games in Support of a Newly Created Degree Program at the University of California, Santa Cruz.” Science & Technology Libraries 27.4 (2007): 77–87. Print. Laskowski, Mary, and David Ward. “Building Next Generation Video Game Collections in Academic Libraries.” Journal of Academic Librarianship 35.3 (2009): 267–273. Print. Leeder, Kim. “The Play Time Manifesto: Why Having Fun Makes Us Better Workers.” Journal of Library Administration 54.7 (2014): 620–628. Print. MacOdrum Library, Carleton University, Challenged Materials in the Library Policy. Web. 7 Jan. 2015. <https://www.library.carleton.ca/about/policies/challengedmaterials-library-policy>. MacOdrum Library. Carleton University. GIS Day at Carleton University, November 19, 2014. Web. 7 Jan. 2015. <https://www.library.carleton.ca/gis-day> McMaster University. Lyons New Media Centre. Web. 9 Jan. 2015. <http://library. mcmaster.ca/lyons> Online Audiovisual Catalogers Inc. (OLAC). Web. 9 Jan. 2015. <http://www.olacinc. org/drupal/>. Robson, Diane, and Patrick Durkee. “New Directions for Academic Video Game Collections: Strategies for Acquiring, Supporting and Managing Online Materials.” Journal of Academic Librarianship 38.2 (2012): 79–84. Print. Smith, Brena. “Twenty First Century Game Studies in the Academy: Libraries and an Emerging Discipline.” Reference Services Review 36.2 (2008): 205–220. Print. Tappeiner, Elizabeth, and Catherine Lyons. “Selection Criteria for Academic Video Game Collections.” Collection Building 27.3 (2008): 121–125. Print.

Copyright of New Review of Academic Librarianship is the property of Routledge and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

