“Shadowdark RPG” Series by Kelsey Dionne and The Arcane Library
“In Shadowdark RPG, you and your group of crawlers use magic, steel, and wits to delve into mysterious ruins, lost cities, and monster-infested depths. Wondrous treasures and long-forgotten secrets await you! But don't let your last torch burn out, or you could be swallowed by the Shadowdark…. 5E players will find what they've been waiting for: an intuitive and complete TTRPG that serves as a seamless bridge into the heart of the Old School Renaissance. Old-school gamers will find a system that is familiar and nostalgic, but with major quality-of-life
upgrades that modernize the old-school experience. Your legend awaits, crawler. Lift your blade, light your torch, and plunge into the unknown depths of the Shadowdark!”
Watch the VODs of these sessions here: Session #1, originally streamed Saturday, January 13, 2024: https://www.twitch.tv/videos/2031578075 Session #2, originally streamed Saturday, January 27, 2024: https://www.twitch.tv/videos/2045484415 Session #3 and Q&A, originally streamed Saturday, February 10, 2024: https://www.twitch.tv/videos/2062893635 https://www.twitch.tv/videos/2062897187

RESOURCES

The Game Shadowdark RPG by Kelsey Dionne and The Arcane Library
● Shadowdark RPG’s Kickstarter campaign page ● Published adventure used (system agnostic OSR adventure): “Puzzle Dungeon: The
Seers Sanctum” by directsun

Actual Plays ● Live Play Example: Shadowdark RPG ● ShadowDark RPG - One Shot Part 1 &

ShadowDark RPG - One Shot Part 2

Articles ● Interview with Kelsey Dionne ● How To Get 5E D&D Players to Try A New RPG System ● What is OSR? A newcomer’s guide to the Old School Renaissance RPGs

Play Alikes ● TTRPGs ○ Knave 2nd Ed by Ben Milton ○ Mausritter by Losing Games ○ Rouge Second Edition by Kazumi Chin ○ Ten Candles by Cavalry Games ○ Troika! Numinous Edition by Melsonian Arts Council ○ Trophy by The Gauntlet ○ Vast in the Dark by Feral Indie Studio ○ Dungeon Solitaire by Matthew Lowes ● Video games ○ Plague Tale by Focus Entertainment ○ Elden Ring by Bandai Namco ○ Darkest Dungeon by Red Hook Studios

Read Alikes ● Books ○ Kings of the Wyld by Nicholas Eames ○ White Plume Mountain by Paul Kidd ● Graphic Novels, Comics, & Manga ○ Berserk by Kentaro Miura ○ The Faraway Paladin by Mutsumi Okubashi

View Alikes ● The Faraway Paladin ● Frieren: Beyond Journey's End ● Made in Abyss ● Record of Lodoss War
Helpful Links ● Session zero ○ GameRT Session Zero Webinar & Resource Slides ○ How to run a session zero ○ New Player’s Guide: How to Make the Most of Session Zero - D&D Beyond ○ Running Session Zeros: SlyFlourish.com ○ Session Zero: A Foundation for Greatness - D&D Beyond ○ The Ultimate D&D Session 0 Checklist ● Character creation ○ Ultimate Character Guides by James Damato ○ Roleplaying Tips by John Four ● GMing for every kind of player ○ Ultimate Game Master Guides by James Damato ○ Return of the Lazy DM by Sly Flourish ○ Adventuring Academy: Interviews!
Safety Tools ● Script Change by Beau Jágr Sheldon ● Guest Blog: An Introduction to Lines and Veils ● The Door is Open by Eirik Fatland ○ Blog by Lizzie Stark ○ Blog 2 by Eirik Fatland ● TTRPG Safety Toolkit collected by Kienna Shaw and Lauren Bryant-Monk ○ TTRPG Safety Toolkit Guide ○ Google Drive ● Consent in Gaming by Sean K. Reynolds and Shanna Germain
GameRT Twitch Policy 1. Be kind and respectful to one another 2. Hate speech of any type will not be tolerated 3. We reserve the right to remove anyone from the chat for any reason

4. If you are feeling harassed by anyone, please ask a GameRT Twitch mod for assistance 5. If you'd rather talk privately about anything, please send us a direct message
Learn More About GameRT Blog: bit.ly/GameRTBlog Facebook: bit.ly/GameRTLeague & bit.ly/GameRTFacebook Resources: bit.ly/GameRTPublicResources Website: bit.ly/GameRTWebsite Zotero: https://bit.ly/GameRTZotero Questions? Email gamert@ala.org

