1
Seattle Public Library as Place:
Reconceptualizing Space, Community, and Information
at the Central Library1
Karen E. Fisher2 Associate Professor The Information School University of Washington Box 352840, Seattle, WA 98105-2840 V: 206-543-6238; F: 206-616-3152; E: fisher@u.washington.edu (To whom all correspondence should be addressed)
Matthew L. Saxton Assistant Professor The Information School University of Washington Box 352840, Seattle, WA 98105-2840 V: 206-616-2542; F: 206-616-3152; E: msaxton@u.washington.edu
Phillip M. Edwards PhD Student The Information School University of Washington Box 352840, Seattle, WA 98105-2840 V: 206-221-6402; F: 206-616-3152; E: pme2@u.washington.edu
Jens-Erik Mai Assistant Professor The Information School University of Washington Box 352840, Seattle, WA 98105-2840 V: 206-616-2541; F: 206-616-3152; E: jemai@u.washington.edu


2
Seattle Public Library as Place:
Reconceptualizing Space, Community, and Information
at the Central Library1


3
Abstract: This field study applies two primary frameworks for understanding
libraries as place, Oldenburg’s “third place” concept and Cresswell’s five facets
of place, to analyze responses from 226 participants regarding the social, political,
cultural, and economic meaning of the newly constructed and internationally
renowned Seattle Public Central Library. Emergent themes are discussed in terms
of the library as a physical place, a social place, and an informational place. While
these two frameworks help explain how libraries as “places” provide social and
economic benefits and foster the growth of social capital within a community,
neither framework adequately addresses the concept of information as it figures in
the broader notion of place. Thus, this study contributes “information” to the
repertoire of place, comprising themes regarding information finding and seeking,
life-long learning, learning resources, and learning environment.


4
Introduction
“Place” as a research phenomenon has occupied scholars in such fields as
sociology, anthropology, and geography—especially human and cultural
geography for decades. Of late, it has also proven a useful concept for
understanding the multiplex dimensions of libraries, how they are perceived and
used by different stakeholders but most specifically, library users. Difficulties lie,
however, in how “place” is understood and operationalized by different
researchers. Such confounding inhibits our knowledge of libraries’ roles in
society. In this paper we address two primary frameworks for understanding
libraries as “place” by drawing upon findings from a field study of the newly
constructed central building of the Seattle Public Library.
Early approaches to understanding “place” tended to focus on describing
its characteristics. Geographer Fred Lukermann, for example, in the 1960s—as
highlighted by Relph [1, p.3] in his history dissertation on the nature of place
characterized “place” as being where:
1. Location is fundamental
2. Nature and culture are involved
3. Spaces are unique but interconnected and part of a framework of
circulation
4. Spaces are localized
5. Spaces are emerging or becoming, and have a historical component


5
While this framework is potentially useful for an elementary understanding of
place, it nonetheless adds the complexity of understanding the related notion of
“space” and does not address the myriad ways in which one may interpret place
such as physical place (a lakeshore), activity (e.g., place of worship) and figure of
speech (“she was put in her place”). “Place” can also be explored in a cultural
sense, as was the recent focus of Feld and Basso’s Senses of Place, which
contains ethnographies of what “place” means to such different populations as the
Apache of Arizona and the Kaluli people of New Guinea in terms of expressing
and knowing [2]. Lippard in Lure of the Local: Senses of Place in a
Multicentered Society similarly discusses “place” by blending history, geography,
cultural/social studies, and contemporary art [3].
In the library and information science (LIS) literature, similar treatments
of place have occurred. Many of these published accounts resemble thought
pieces, polemics, or focus heavily on user satisfaction in addition to focusing on
library as a place of social, political, cultural, and physical dimensions, i.e.,
physical arrangement of materials. For example, Curry, Dunbar, George, and
Marshall (2004) conducted a survey of over 500 library users across four branch
libraries locations built from 2002-2004 in British Columbia, Canada [4]. In
these surveys, the researchers asked library users about satisfaction with
individual features/components of the building and facilities; the most highly
ranked features across all settings were windows and lighting, particularly natural
lighting. Numerous works thus abound, especially in the professional literature,
of how libraries design diverse services and engage physical space and objects to


6
address users’ needs beyond those of such time-tested sources as monographs and
serials. Allen and Watstein [5], Ginsbug [6], Albanese [7], Shill and Tonner [8],
and Engel and Antell [9], for example, discusses the college campus library
context; Weise [10] focuses on health library settings; Wagner [11], Gosling [12],
St. Lifer [13], Demas and Scherer [14], McKinney [15], Ranseen [16], Saanwald
[17], Alstad and Curry [18], Bryson, Usherwood and London [19], Bundy [20],
Wood [21], and Worpole [22] address public libraries; Crumpacker [23] suggests
ways that school libraries can be more inviting while the entire 1999 issue of the
regional journal Alki was devoted to professional renderings on “the library as
place [24].”
In a cognate vein, in introducing an issue of American Studies devoted to
the theme of “The American Library as an Agency of Culture,” Augst proposes
that libraries function as place in three ways: as social enterprises, as part of the
physical/public infrastructure, and as sites of collective memory [25]. Thomas, in
her 1996 dissertation, employs a social constructionist approach to discursively
view academic, public and school library practices architecturally [26]. A
different interesting twist emerged from Marylaine Block’s interviews with two
non-LIS staff from the nonprofit “Project for Public Spaces (pps.org)” in the
article “How to Become a Great Public Space [27].” According to her experts,
while libraries have the stature for being anchors of community life, their staunch
internal-focus relegates them to “community living room[s], at best” as opposed
to the community front porch—a place to launch activities and contacts with other
people, instead. Four qualities cited as intrinsic for great public spaces include:


7
access and linkages (easy to get to, connected to surrounding community);
comfort and image (safe, clean and attractive); uses and activities (as many a
things to do); and, sociability (place to meet other people). Libraries that exhibit
these criteria were the New York Public Library, Multnomah County Library in
Portland, Oregon, and the Beaches Toronto Branch Library.
While these articles tend not to focus in-depth on conceptualizing “place”
theoretically, at the same time in-depth explorations of the ways in which
individuals, families, neighborhood and communities benefit from libraries have
tended not to frame their findings in terms of place. For example, Durrance and
Fisher [28] in their monograph How Libraries and Librarians Help discuss ranges
of library outcomes as does Nancy Kranich similarly in her edited work Libraries
and Democracy: The Cornerstones of Liberty [29, pp. 49-59] and Molz and Dain
[30] in Civic Space/Cyberspace: The American Public Library in the Information
Age. None of these works, however, employ “place” as a theoretical framework.
Fisher, Durrance and Hinton [31], albeit, use Fisher’s related notion of
information grounds [32] to interpret findings from their study of Queens
Borough Public Library system and its immigrant users. Consequently, LIS does
not have a robust framework for analyzing the roles of libraries in terms of
“place”—a problem noted eloquently by Wiegand who laments the “cost to LIS
of ignoring ‘place’ and ‘reading’” [33], and by Gorman in emphasizing the wide
ranging values that the public attributes to libraries and yet is little systematically
documented [34].


8
Perhaps the closest that the LIS field has come to implementing an in
depth “place”-based framework was carried out by Leckie and Hopkins, who
examined the public place of the Toronto and Vancouver central libraries by
conducting over 1900 user surveys, 100 user interviews, staff interviews, and
observational seating sweeps to gather individuals’ perceptions and common
usage patterns of library materials and facilities [35]. As part of critiquing an
interdisciplinary literature on the nature of “public space” in contemporary
society, especially in terms of public rights, privacy and access, they highlight
Ray Oldenburg’s assertion that “highly successful public places”—of which
libraries should number and which Oldenburg refers to as “third places’
comprise eight key characteristics [36]. While Leckie and Hopkins discussed
their findings along three major strands, they did not revisit Oldenburg’s
framework. In brief, they reported that (1) central libraries are unique, necessary
and heavily utilized places, (2) new information technologies augment as opposed
to diminish the role of these places, and (3) the encroachment of private interests
(e.g., ongoing commercialization) is threatening to “transform the fundamental
nature of libraries” [35, p. 360] as public places. Relatedly, the notion of “sense
of place (SoP) in the context of regionalism” was perceptively highlighted by
Kathleen de la Pena McCook in her text Introduction to Public Librarianship [37].
Also connecting with Oldenburg’s third place work, she holistically defined sense
of place as “the sum total of all perceptions—aesthetic, emotional, historical,
supernal—that a physical location, and the activities and emotional responses
associated with that location, invoke in people” and further asserted that public


9
libraries, having exemplary sense of place to its constituents, can help
communities keep their distinct characters [37, p. 294]. Libraries, she remarked,
are continuously challenged with balancing their mandate of preserving their
communities’ “sense of place” with the need of providing service beyond their
predetermined geographic borders.
Conceptualizing Place
In our journey to understand library as place we encountered two
frameworks that we perceive as potentially useful for guiding empirical
investigation: Oldenburg’s [36] notion of the third place, and Creswell’s [38]
extended five-part definition of place. These frameworks are particularly useful
because they illuminate the research problem by making core terms (e.g., place
and space) explicit and operationalizable.
In his widely popularized book The Great Good Place: Cafes, Coffee
Shops, Bookstores, Bars, Hair Salons, and Other Hangouts at the Heart of a
Community, Oldenburg introduced the phrase “The third place” and hence
affected the title of many community-oriented businesses such as Seattle’s “Third
Place Books.” According to Oldenburg, public places such as cafes and hair
salons function as our “third place,” i.e., where people can be found when they are
not at home or work. A veritable and necessary social good, Oldenburg describes
several third places and conceptualizes on their nature, which as neighborhood
locales must exhibit the following eight characteristics to be successful and attract
people:


10
1. Occur on neutral ground where “individuals may come and go as they please,
in which none are required to play host, and in which all feel at home and
comfortable” [36, p. 22];
2. Be levelers, inclusive places that are “accessible to the general public and
does not set formal criteria of membership and exclusion” and thus promote
the expansion of social networks where people interact with others who do no
comprise their nearest and dearest [36, p. 24];
3. Have conversation as the main activity—as Oldenburg explains, “nothing
more clearly indicates a third place than that the talk is good; that it is lively,
scintillating, colorful, and engaging” [36, p. 26], moreover, “it is more spirited
than elsewhere, less inhibited and more eagerly pursued” [36, p. 29];
4. Are accessible and accommodating: the best third places are those to which
one may go alone at most anytime and be assured of finding an acquaintance
[36, p. 32];
5. Have “regulars” or “fellow customers” as it is these, not the “seating capacity,
variety of beverages served, availability of parking, prices, or other features”
that draw people in, “who feel at home in a place and set the tone of
conviviality” while nurturing trust with newcomers [36, pp. 33-35];


11
6. Keep a low profile as a physical structure, meaning they are “typically plain,”
unimpressive looking from the outside and not elegant, which “serves to
discourage pretension among those gather there” and meld into its customers’
daily routine [36, p. 37];
7. Have a persistent playful, playground sort of mood: As Oldenburg explains,
“those who would keep a conversation serious for more than a minute are
almost certainly doomed to failure. Every topic and speaker is a potential
trapeze for the exercise and display of wit” [36, p. 37];
8. Are a home away from home, the places where people can be likely found
when not at home or at work, “though a radically different kind of setting
from home, the third place is remarkably similar to a good home in the
psychological comfort and support that it extends” [36, p. 42].
Oldenburg further espouses third places in terms of their personal benefits, which
include novelty, perspective, spiritual tonic, and friendship; societal good in terms
of their political role, habit of association, role as an agency for control and force
for good, recreational spirit, and importance “in securing the public domain for
the use and enjoyment of decent people” [36, p. 83]—in addition to the negative
or down-side of third places such as segregation, isolation and hostility. In many
ways, Oldenburg’s work suggests that third places build social capital,


12
popularized by Robert Putnam and Lewis Feldstein as the “making connections
among people, establishing bonds of trust and understanding, and building
community [39, p. 1].” Oldenburg, however, omits libraries as a potential third
place, including from his 2002 edited work of 19 third place examples from
across the country that include coffee shops, a bookstore, a gym and urban
streetscape [40]. Putnam, on the other hand, acknowledges the pivotal role of
public libraries in building and maintaining social capital in his case study of the
Chicago Public Library’s Near North Branch Library [39].3
Oldenburg’s strict focus on the public or social dimensions of place alerts
one to the need for addressing other nuances. In this respect we turn to Cresswell,
a professor of social and cultural geography at the University of Wales who
crafted Place: A Short Introduction. He asserts that place can be defined in five
ways, the first three of which he borrows from political geographer John Agnew
[43]:
1. Location – the fixed objective position or coordinates [38, p. 6];
2. Locale – ‘the material setting for social relations—the actual shape
of place within which people conduct their lives as individuals” [38, p. 7];
3. Sense of Place – “the subjective and emotional attachment people
have to place” [38, p. 7];
To these Cresswell adds two other definitions:


13
4. Space – a more abstract concept than “place,” space separates
places and is “a realm without meaning” [38, p. 10];
5. Landscape – “the material topography,” whether natural or human
made; people do not lives in landscapes, they look at them [38, p. 11].
In terms of libraries, both Oldenburg’s and Cresswell’s frameworks offer
insightful orientations for understanding the roles of libraries within society.
Whereas Cresswell provides an encompassing overview of five distinct facets of
place, Oldenburg focuses more specifically on the social side, which would
equate more or less with Cresswell’s definitions of locale and sense of place.
Noticeably absent from both frameworks if applied to a library setting, however,
is the concept of information as it figures in the broader notion of place, although
information may be loosely equated with Oldenburg’s third concept of
conversation and books may be regarded as part of Cresswell’s locale, i.e., the
material setting, neither framework explicitly incorporates information seeking
and consumption as a core aspect of place. Thus the current study may contribute
to the foregoing frameworks by adding “information” to the repertoire of place.
The Current Study
On Sunday, May 23, 2004, the newly-constructed, 152 million dollar
Central Library building of the Seattle Public Library (SPL) was unveiled to the
public. This event garnered both local and national media attention. The


14
construction project was an innovative experiment in library architecture and
services. As an object of study, the new SPL Central Library building is
intriguing in several respects: the design choices regarding allocation of
functional and social space, the revision of the staffing model to accommodate a
new mix of service points, and the reorganization of the nonfiction collection as a
“book spiral”, i.e., an unbroken, concentric run of materials arranged by Dewey
Decimal Classification (DDC) that ascends four floors. The building has two
street-level public entrances and an elevator connecting to the underground
parking garage (Figure 1).4 From the first entrance, 4th Avenue, users have
immediate access to the checkout desk, the book return, a colorful Children’s
Center, English-as-a-Second-Language (ESL) materials and a 425-seat
auditorium. The 2nd street-level entrance, 5th Avenue, users enter a high-ceilinged
atrium filled with natural light that leads to the fiction collection, young adult
resources, the SPL Foundation gift shop, and an espresso stand. Stairways lead to
the 4th floor meeting rooms; escalators to the 5th level arrive at the “Mixing
Chamber,” which has over 100 public access computers and the reference
collection where librarians freely move about using GPS-enabled Vocera wireless
communication devices. Levels 6 through 9 contain the book spiral; the 10th level
features a 12,000-square foot reading room; the 11th level houses the
administrative offices.
[Insert Figure 1 about here]
In the art journal Metropolis, the rationale behind the building design was
explained as:


15
The firm [OMA] divided the [SPL’s] program into two
categories—stable areas, which hold a range of predictable
activities, and unstable areas, whose future uses are unpredictable.
By combing through the board’s program, OMA discovered five
stable functions: the headquarters (administrative offices); a spiral
shaped book-storage system, along which the library’s collection
could expand or contract (rather than dividing the collection room
by room); the meeting areas (anything larger than a conference
room); the staff areas (where books are ordered, repaired, and
sorted); and the parking garage. The design treats each of these
five programmatic areas—called “boxes”—as independent
buildings with their own mechanical and structural systems [44, p.
141].
To better understand the perceptions of Seattle’s denizens towards the new
SPL central building, considered perhaps the world’s most avant garde, we drew
upon the earlier frameworks of “place” to derive the following primary research
question:
What does the SPL Central Library mean—socially, politically,
culturally, and economically—to library users and passers-by?
Additionally we were interested in the impact of the book spiral. Some of its
presumed advantages were ease of access, especially for disabled users, and ease
of maintenance for library staff.5 Thus a secondary research question comprised:


16
How does the book spiral affect users’ understanding of how the
collection is organized?
Methodology
To address our research questions we interviewed three groups of
informants: (1) people in the book spiral, (2) people in other parts of the library,
and (3) people walking by outside (passers-by), who could potentially also be
non-users. We targeted individuals in the book spiral as they might have the most
to say about the structure of the spiral and the use of this architectural feature as
an organizing tool. This tripartite pool enabled us to collect a diverse range of
responses from different segments of the Central Library’s service population,
including frequenters of downtown Seattle, both residents and workers, and
visitors.
Library users were asked 30 open and closed questions (Appendix A);
passers-by were asked 17 of the same (Appendix B). Questions reflected three
categories of people’s perceptions of the SPL as a:
• physical place (i.e., what they liked or disliked about the structure and its
surroundings);
• social place (i.e., how they interacted with other people, sense of
community); and
• informational place (i.e., perceptions of library materials and specifically
the design and structure of the book spiral).


17
Following questions about visit frequency to the downtown area and the Central
Library, participants were asked about the building and the role of SPL in their
daily lives, followed by a free association exercise to discover the concepts that
they associated with eight basic terms: architecture, books, community, free
speech, learning, librarians, reading, and technology. While participants were
encouraged to respond with a phrase, the sequencing of the terms varied across
interviews to control response bias. Rooted in early experiments by Galton in the
1880s, free association is a popular social science research method but has been
rarely used in LIS. In one of the earliest descriptions of the free association
method, Wheat said that difficulty lay with selecting words that could be
understood in the same way by all people, especially as ethnicity, regionalism and
English-as-a-second language can affect word interpretation [46]. He also noted
that word types can make a difference in responses as nouns result in more
common responses while verbs, prepositions and conjunctions cause more
abstract and less common answers. More recently, Nelson, McEvoy and Dennis
assert that people who have similar experiences and come from similar social
units are likely to have shared associations between stimulus and response words
that should not be expected from others [47].6 After the free association terms, the
interviews concluded with demographic questions to determine how well the
sample resembled a cross-section of the Seattle population in terms of age,
gender, ethnicity, income, education, and occupation.
The interviewers were graduate students at the Information School of the
University of Washington. Following a two-hour training session involving role


18
play scenarios, interviewers engaged in a one-week pilot study for additional
hands-on experience and to pretest the instruments. Subsequent debriefing led to
several revisions to improve the clarity of the instruments.7 Data collection was
randomly scheduled during the mornings, afternoons and evenings to reflect
SPL’s opening hours over three weeks (October 8, 2004 - November 7, 2004).
This time period was considered typical as schools and colleges were in session
and no federal holidays occurred (no data were collected on October 31st). Rather
than attempting to draw a proportionately representative sample, we sought to
obtain a diverse sample to maximize the number of different perspectives
available and thus utilized a non-random sampling technique. Interviewers varied
who they approached by alternating between sexes, ages, styles of dress, and
apparent ethnicity. As an incentive to participate, respondents received a
Starbucks espresso coupon. Two uncontrollable factors, however, may have
affected people’s perceptions of civic institutions, needs for information, and
sense of community, namely the co-occurrence of (1) the U.S. presidential
election, which may have resulted in greater awareness and interest in political
issues (e.g., the term “free speech” during the free association exercise), and (2)
controversial U.S. military operations in Iraq—the perceptions and attitudes of the
Seattle population toward government may have been more personally affected
given the numerous military installations in the surrounding counties.
Interviewers recorded responses as phrases and key words using the
informant’s own words rather then rephrasing. Interviewers would later
transcribe these responses and their field notes (operational, methodological,


19
theoretical) into electronic form using QSR NUD*IST 5 (qualitative data
management software). Content analysis was performed to identify themes that
reflected our theoretical frameworks as well as emergent themes, counter
examples and anomalies. Following an overview of our respondents’ socio
demographic characteristics, we address their perceptions of SPL as a physical,
social and informational space in downtown Seattle to determine what, if any,
symbolic or practical meaning they attribute to the library.
The SPL Central Library: Its Users and Passers-by
We conducted 226 interviews over a three week period. During this
period, 259 individuals who were approached decline to participate, indicating a
response rate of 46.6%, which is approximately twice the response rate for a
typical survey. Approximately two-thirds of the interviews occurred with users
inside the building (151 interviews), and one third occurred with passers-by (75
interviews). Among the users, the sample included both frequent and infrequent
visitors to the library. While 44.4% reported visiting the library on weekly or
daily basis, 20.5% stated that this was their first ever visit to the Central Library.
About one third of the users had been visiting the Central Library site for over
five years, while almost half had only visited after the new building was
completed. Among the passers-by, 64.0% reported walking by the Central Library
building more than once per week, and 73.3% said they had used the Central
Library at some point.


20
Almost 4 out of 5 members of the sample (78.8%) reported having a valid
library card for the Seattle Public Library system, indicating that the sample
largely comprised library users, and almost all were residents of Seattle or King
County (85.4%). The sample was evenly split between men (51.7%) and women
(48.3%). The overwhelming majority of participants were White (67.3%), and
spoke English as the primary language in the home (86.7%). Asian (12.4%),
Black or African American (7.5%), and multiracial (6.1%) self-identifications
were the most predominant of the remaining reported ethnicities, however those
reporting a non-English language spoken at home comprised less than 3% of the
sample. Participants ranged in age from 18 to 82, indicating that sample included
individuals from diverse stages of life.
Educational attainment among the participants was consistent with that of
the available data for the city of Seattle: 96.0% had at least a high school diploma
or equivalent, and 56.2% had a Bachelor’s degree or graduate degree. In the 2003
American Community Survey, the U.S. Census Bureau reports associated figures
of 93.4% and 51.6% for Seattle [57]. Participants had broad ranging occupations
though many were students (14.1%), unemployed (11.5%), or retired individuals
(9.7%). Income distribution was skewed toward lower annual income categories;
41.1% of respondents earned less than $30,000, 29.6% earned between $30,001
and $75,000, and 22.6% earned more than $75,000.
We further conducted interviews with 75 passers-by, and the participation
rate within this group was slightly lower (39.1%) than calculated for the entire
sample. 64.0% of the passers-by in our sample reported walking by the Central


21
Library building more than once per week, and 73.3% reported that they had used
the Central Library at some point.
In the remainder of our paper we discuss our findings regarding “SPL as
Place” along three main themes: SPL as physical place in structural and
architectural terms; SPL as social place; and, SPL as informational place. We
conclude by revisiting our two theoretical frameworks and sharing suggestions for
future research.
SPL as Physical Place: Structure and Architecture
I’m a warm and cozy person, so when I first saw it, it seemed cold.
But now that we’re here, we’ve made it our own place.
The preceding quote best typifies the reaction expressed by many
regarding the theme of SPL as physical place. The architecture of the central
library is modern, challenging in terms of being unlike any other place in Seattle,
and presents an environment that cannot be assimilated all at once. Even after a
dozen visits to the site, we found new features, rooms, and spaces of which we
were previously unaware. The great majority of all users and passers-by expressed
strong feelings about the new building, regardless of whether they “loved it” or
“hated it.” In their responses, participants frequently used superlatives (e.g.
greatest, ugliest, most exciting, coldest, loveliest, etc.) to describe their feelings
and reactions to the physical structure. However, regardless of whether they


22
initially admired or despised the structure, most expressed a sense of ownership of
the space and recognized that this was “their” library.
One of the most common emergent themes was that of civic pride and the
role of the central library building as a symbol of modernity and forward thinking.
Such comments were more common from passers-by, those who live and work in
the vicinity of the structure, but were also echoed by those within the building.
While perhaps such comments may initially sound cliché—such as one might
hear from a city “booster”—they were nonetheless the exact terms and sentiments
expressed by most informants. Far from being labeled as an archaic institution in
the age of the Internet or being associated with a pre-digital past, the library was
identified as “new,” “modern,” “vibrant,” “exciting,” “innovative,” and
visionary,” as explained by the following respondent:
Sometimes we get stuck in notions of how things ought to be
what’s appropriate and what’s not. This gives us an opportunity to
go out of the mode of what we think of as urban structures. Not a
lot of embellished finishes. Things are open and exposed. Don’t
have to have all that to make it a great space.
The informants also recognized the structure as a “spotlight,” “showcase,”
“attraction,” “landmark,” and “icon.” Following the Space Needle as a city icon,
SPL has captured the public’s imagination as a unique element of the city’s
landscape and a point of interest for locals and visitors alike. As a respondent


23
observed, “This is one of the greatest additions to Seattle that I’ve seen in a long
time. Sometimes, I purposely walk by just to pass it.” Another echoed these
thoughts with, “It’s a change from how people think of libraries. I keep coming
back. Sometimes, I walk through just to walk through the library.”
Focusing on the interior of the structure, another popular theme to emerge
is the sense of light and spaciousness throughout the structure. Glass walls
provide a sense of openness on all floors. Even within the stacks of the book
spiral, a glance to right or left will provide a vista of the streetscape and
neighboring towers. Many observed that this had an inspirational effect, using
terms such as “inspiring,” “bright,” “airy,” “never crowded,” and “open“ to
describe the atmosphere. One stated, “I like the transparency between the inside
and the outside. Still feels like it’s part of the city even though it’s a huge
building.” Far from the idea of a library as a place of separation or seclusion, the
structure gives the reader a feeling of greater connection with the surrounding
city.
The visitor is presented with balconies and open views to the main floor at
a number of places, resulting in mixed responses of delight and uneasiness, as
expressed in the following observations. One expressed, “You can go up 9 to 10
levels and look down over rail. The rail comes up to my hip. You know how you
get that stomach feeling, when it lurches? I love that!” while another had a
negative reaction, stating, “I was immediately taken by the suicide platform at the
top.” While agoraphobics may seek out spaces towards the interior of the building


24
that are less exposed, most informants expressed pleasure with the spacious views
and grand open spaces within the structure.
The minority of informants who disliked the structure almost exclusively
referred to a sense of coldness or bleak quality in the modern style. They used
terms such as “cold,” “uncomfortable,” “unfinished,” “austere,” “intimidating,”
and “grey” to describe their perceptions. The predominance of “concrete” and
lack of carpeting contributed to this feeling. The building was likened to a
“warehouse” and a “minimal security prison.” Several of these respondents
sought to soften their criticism by suggesting that they didn’t “care for modern
architecture” regardless of purpose or setting, and went on to make many
complimentary statements about how important the library was to them. This
distinction between the library as a structure and the library as a service
organization indicates a depth of thought and reflection on the purpose of library
in the community. One observed, “The building isn’t worth it, but the library is.”
During the word association exercise, both positive and negative responses
to the term Architecture were consistent across both users and passers-by alike
(Table 1).
[Insert Table 1 about here]
The last theme to emerge is the identification of the new library as an
improvement over the old. Subjects described the old facility as “tired,”
“crowded,” “worn,” “deplorable,” and “falling apart.” Such criticisms of the old
building are probably vocalized more frequently now as users make mental
comparisons to the new structure. Beyond the aesthetic considerations of the


25
architecture itself, informants recognized the new facility as providing more
technology, more space, and more resources than the previous facility. The
building draws new users, as one indicated, “I know more people who have come
to this library than the old one. They’re excited about this library.” Whether the
impressions regarding the size of collections are justified or not, users expressed a
sense the new building has more books, more magazines, and more CDs to offer
than the old facility. Despite the ease with which materials can be shipped to any
branch, several informants noted their primary motivation to visit the downtown
library is to review sources that are not available at their local branch, indicating
that they value “seeing” items all in one physical space. Informants also
reaffirmed the downtown location as a “convenient” site for the library in that it
provides access to both public transport and local freeways. The library has been
located on this specific block in Seattle for over a century, and the residents
continue to value its central location in the prime commercial heart of the city.
At the end of the interview, users were asked if they had anything else
they wanted to say to the City Librarian or Board of Trustees. One subject noted,
“I congratulate them for having the courage to make this happen,” and another
said, “It means a lot for Seattle to support something that was so controversial and
to move on through it... It is a testament to accomplishing things and realizing the
public sector deserves the best that we can give them.” Several echoed this
sentiment of courage as reflected with the decision to go with a modern
architectural style and to build such a grand structure for a public institution in the
face of a weakening economy. The building becomes a statement about the values


26
and priorities of the city’s residents, and the determination and strength it requires
to make those priorities real in a physical sense.
SPL as Social Place
I will bring a friend next week for the very special purpose of
seeing the building and each other. It’s a destination, a very
special building.
To come here is a kind of a social event for me. People are
checking it out, which is good but it’s not like I come here to find
dates. Not yet, at least.
While public library mission statements have long focused upon educating
the masses, librarians have been well aware of the social functions that libraries
play, from the toddler who learns to share books at baby story times to the
teenager who meets rambunctiously with peers in the computer room, and from
the homeless who seek nooks for rest to the seniors whose only public outing may
be the weekly book club meetings. Aside from a few key works (e.g., Durrance
and Fisher [28], McKechnie and McKenzie [58]) however, little basic research
has systematically addressed the social role that the public library plays in the
lives of its users. The new SPL building was designed with an express purpose of
bringing people together via its meeting rooms, collaborative work spaces, coffee


27
stand, atria, use of color, lighting and furniture. Indeed, the third floor of SPL is
called the “Living Room.” But how effective are these efforts?
Our survey comprised several questions regarding the social effects of the
new SPL. First were interested in whether people came to SPL with other people,
meaning was there a social aspect in the simple act of visiting SPL? Of the users,
76.2% said that they had come alone that day while 23.8% had been accompanied
by someone else. However, when asked if they ever come with others, over half
(53.6%) replied “yes.” Analysis of these companions were invariably strong ties
comprising family and friends. Others to make the trip included roommates,
elderly neighbors, co-workers (en route to or from work), paid caregivers and out
of town visitors. The heartening finding thus here is that SPL serves as a
connector, it provides social opportunities for people to interact across the
generations. As shown in Table 2, responses regarding why people come to SPL
together ran the gamut: from using services and obtaining materials to sharing an
experience to the pragmatic of saving parking fees. These themes were typified
by users who said: “I came with visitors from out of town; they read about the
library in the newspapers and wanted to see it,” “I visit with friends at the
library,” “I come with my children and husband for schoolwork. We take turns
watching the kids and using the library,” and “I come with my wife and the other
members of the genealogy club.”
[Insert Table 2 about here]
Respondents were further asked “Do you ever come to do things for other
people?” Of the 32.5% who said “yes,” the recipients of their generosity included


28
family members, friends, roommates and neighbors as well as students and
members of groups such as the Sci-Fi Museum, book clubs and community based
organizations. Activities that users perform on behalf of others ranged from
borrowing and returning materials (books, movies, CDs), doing research using the
collection, using the computers to search the Web, check email, write and print
documents, and working on school projects. Most representatively and
memorably we were told:
• “I look at Arab books for my woman”
• “Sometimes I compare financial news for friends”
• “My sister’s in jail because of her manic depression condition. I want to
help her get treatment and want to learn about what it’s like for her”
• “I used the computers to produce a newsletter for a volunteer position I
hold”
• “I have an invalid friend and I sometimes get CDs for her”
• “I come to do things for my son because he has a very busy schedule and
my parents because they are home bound”
Like many libraries, SPL features regular presentations for the public on an
array of topics. Of our respondents, however, only 9.4% had ever come to one in
the new building—which was not surprising given how recently the building had
opening. The types of presentations they attended included children’s storytime,
the Opening Day Welcoming Ceremony, Chinese dancing, music concerts, the
Warsaw Uprising 60th Anniversary and the September Project.


29
One third of users indicated that they used SPL for work. While the most
frequent reason was to find a job, other responses included for research, to print
documents, use the computer, get materials, write documents and presentations.
Our examples show that people who work in varied positions rely on SPL to get
the job done, especially teachers who use it to get materials for their lessons (“I’m
a teacher, I look for children’s book on various subjects”), chefs (“I’m looking for
recipes of Thai food to cook in the restaurant where I work” and “for work, I’m
checking on specialized cooking for Italian or French cooking”), and business
owners (“My business is container gardening so I look for books on this subject”).
Other respondents described their work-related uses as “I looked up stuff about
the Americans with Disabilities act and ASL—American Sign Language,” “I
[used the computer] to get an application for a professional exam,” “I’m here to
get educational material, technical information related to my job,” and “I research
patents, children’s book ideas on bees, and textile resources.” Two separate
authors said that they use SPL as a place “to write” and to meet with editors.
Thus far we have addressed the more obvious social aspects of SPL such as
with whom people visit and why. Deeper understanding of SPL’s social
dimensions, however, lurks in the undercurrents of people’s views of SPL and
community, its architecture, its books and librarians, and the relationship between
SPL and freedom of speech. Results from the word association method using the
term “community” were rich and mainly positive. As shown in Table 3, users and
passers-by alike replied that together “SPL and community” largely signified an
important melding of varied people in a warm environment. Illustrative remarks


30
ranged from the basic: “Everybody gets together here,” “It’s good for the
community to have a library,” “This is a good service to the community,” “It
brings everybody together, you feel like you’re part of something,” “it’s a
building that brings different populations together,” “it feels like a place where
people come together,” and “lends itself to community; good informal public
spaces,” to the more analytic, such as:
Buildings always represent community. This is a community that
is really out there and willing to test the waters. Many
communities would never have let this happen. [SPL] is forward
looking.
And,
I think of the library when I think of the city....it‘s a major
component. I’m trying to learn to use it better.
The few negative observations were along the line of the following: “This library
is trying to be conducive to building community, but there’s a lack of information
about the events here. They have the right idea, but they don’t market it very
well. I see advertisements about what’s going on at Kane Hall [auditorium at the
University of Washington] but not here. I don’t know what’s coming, ” and
“[It’s] forced. They’re trying to create a sense of community, but forgetting some
groups of people. I think this building represents a narrow-minded sense of
community.”
[Insert Table 3 about here]


31
While architecture and the trappings of physical comfort à la furniture,
open space, greenery, lighting and refreshments can do wonders for the
heightening of a building and its inhabitants’ sociability—as discussed earlier
under “architecture,” to people who truly know book and librarians the latter are
also intrinsic elements in the social life of a library. While responses to the word
association method regarding “books” are shared in our discussion of physical
place, they also bear mentioning here because of the pervasive ways in which
both users and passers-by spoken frequently of books as their “friends”—friends
that you could meet at the library or friends that could accompany you home or
elsewhere, courtesy of the library. Moreover, respondents spoke about books
using such as terms as “love,” “exciting,” “needed” and “take you away.” As a 37
year old female library user gushed, “anything you want is in a book except
human contact, and even then if you’re engrossed in the story that is a form of
contact.”
Users’ and passers-bys’ views of librarians were somewhat similar if in a
less openly emotive way. As shown in Table 4, as a social type librarians were
invariably cast as nice, kind, friendly, helpful, educated, knowledgeable, and yet
quiet women, who wear glasses and provide people with advice and aid in
searching. While the users provided more comments on “librarians” than their
passer-by counterparts, their tenor was similar. A more colorful remark “They
know everything! If I say, “I read this book once and it had this girl in it,” they’re
like “I know that book, it’s right over there.” General melee over who exactly a
librarian is from amongst all a library’s staff, however, still exists in the minds of


32
at least some users, which results in negative comments. For instance, one passer
by said “They don’t know how to use the equipment, a lot of them haven’t been
trained,” while a user sniped “Too overzealous. Every time I go to have a smoke
I have to hide books or they stash them in a back room for a couple of days.”
Another theme was that respondents felt that they did not see or interact enough
with librarians. Responses along these lines included: “Librarians are very
talented... I wish there was more opportunity for us to have one-on-one contact
with librarians,” “Haven’t met one in this library but I admire librarians,”
“[Librarians are] concentrated on the 5th floor. I wonder how visible they are,”
“They’ve been nice to me but I don’t have much contact with them,” and “unlike
many of the public places that I go where I know people’s names and addresses, I
haven’t yet gotten to know any of these librarians or their names.” On the one
hand, this suggests that the public is savvy: it knows that the person behind the
circulation desk or providing security is not a librarian; on the other hand, it
further suggests that perhaps librarians have become invisible, that the few who
haven’t been replaced by technicians or paraprofessionals are mainly behind the
scenes, and that a lack of name badges or other prominent signage is keeping
them from being easily identified. Whatever the reasons, the public—at least
those of SPL—admires their librarians, knows their worth and wants to see and
interact with more of them.
[Insert Table 4 about here]
The final element in our analysis of the social dimensions of “SPL as
Place” relate to the notion of free speech. Long considered a “library” hallmark,


33
at least by librarians and film director and author Michael Moore whose work
“Stupid White Men” was only published due to efforts of librarians, freedom of
expression is a nebulous concept that we were unsure that the public might
connect with libraries. Results from the word analysis method indicated that this
was somewhat the case in that many comments pertained to the notion of free
speech itself and not in connection to free speech in terms of SPL. Moreover, due
to the overlap in timing of our study with the national election, several responses
reflected anti-Bush and anti-Republican fervor in the predominantly Democrat
stronghold of Seattle. However, many respondents did have lengthy remarks that
clearly illustrated an understanding of the relationship between freedom of
expression and libraries. On the negative side, one user said that “You’re not
allowed to talk in the library,” while another asserted that free speech was
“ignored” and added “a display on the first floor is very offensive to the President,
the Republicans and our participation in the war. I have complained about it. I
also asked for a typewriter to be available but never heard from anyone.” On the
positive side of the relationship between SPL and freedom speech, many
comments were made, from the basic that’s “What libraries are for,” “ask
questions, they’ll freely help you here. Very helpful in there, ” “No problems
with free speech at the library,” “relates to library policy of non-discrimination,”
and “[they have] literature of different opinions,” “Definitely, [SPL] is a public
space, at least on the first floor. You can talk freely there,” and “It’s pretty good,
I liked the September project, the painting,” other responses centered around
SPL’s practice of not divulging borrowers’ records, for example: “I think it’s


34
terrific they don’t give out patrons’ records. Who’s that guy? Ashcroft? I think
he’s a Nazi,” and “it’s good, [the library is] protected, records are destroyed.”
Perhaps the most illustrative if not oddest came the use who said:
I yelled at a librarian the other day. Actually he was a technician.
I couldn’t get logged in and he said that the computer was
reserved. I said I only wanted it for 5 minutes and he said “okay,”
but by that time someone else had taken it and there were no others
for me. So I yelled at him. I didn’t get kicked out, so I guess
that‘s free speech.
SPL as Informational Place
Informants readily identified the Central Library as a place for obtaining
information and for learning. While this observation is not surprising, the
comments of those interviewed indicate a deep recognition of the importance of
information and education in their lives and also illustrate a high social value
placed on learning both for themselves and for the community as a whole.
Coupled with this recognition, the concept of free access was also highly valued
and frequently mentioned by those surveyed. While they did not use a term such
as “digital divide,” users and passers-by alike identified the communal social
benefit to providing access to the Internet and access to computers to all segments
of the population regardless of ability to pay.


35
One of the most common terms used by all subjects was “find,” regardless
of what it was being sought. Informants were highly aware of the library as a
place to “find,” “seek,” “locate,” “get,” “explore,” “discover,” or gain “access” to
information, or as one informant worded it, “things you need.” They used terms
such as “gateway” and “catalyst” to describe the library’s function. As one user
commented, “It’s like a treasure for me. I can get anything I want if I have time.”
Another stated “There are more computer terminals than I’ve seen anywhere else.
It’s a real tool.” These quotes reflect two important characteristics. First, the
library is perceived as an endless source of information, a thought echoed by
another informant who used the term “no boundaries.” to describe what the
library meant to them. Second, the informant recognized the library as a place
where they must commit something of themselves, in this instance “time,” or use
a “tool” in order to gain benefit.
One evident difference between the perceptions of users and passers-by
appeared in how both groups characterized what people wanted to find. Passers
by tended to define the search in terms of objects. They described the library as a
place to find “books,” “newspapers,” or “CDs.” In contrast, users more
frequently spoke of “information,” “research,” or “knowledge.” This difference
may indicate deeper reflection on the part of the users, or perhaps a problem
solving perspective that is not necessarily shared by non-users. While passers-by
placed a value on the library as a warehouse of materials, users tended to focus on
what they gain from these materials. One commented, “At this point in my life,


36
it’s a place for seeking and understanding.” This thought illustrates that the library
is associated with the process of thinking and not only obtaining information.
Many of those interviewed also described the role of librarians and staff in
helping them find information. Almost all statements were favorable (informants
who felt free to criticize the building may have been less willing to criticize
individuals) and many expressed gratitude for the assistance they have received.
While past studies reveal that responses about libraries and librarians may be
influenced by a halo effect, numerous participants gave concrete explanations of
why they were pleased with assistance. One typical comment was, ““Librarians
deserve whatever break they can get. The go out of their way to be helpful.” The
librarian is perceived as doing more than expected in terms of finding
information. Another shared perception was that librarians are patient and tolerant
of those who don’t know “simple” things as explained by the following
respondent:
I’m sure they are asked many simple questions like how to find
this [he holds up a piece of paper with a call number on it] and
they never seem to mind answering. I’ve never had problems
getting help.
Such observations are in direct contrast to the stereotype of the librarian that
permeates popular culture as an impersonal, condescending, and rule-bound
individual.


37
In addition to finding and seeking, participants frequently discussed
themes related to life-long learning, learning resources, and learning environment.
Users were far more likely than passers-by to discuss the library as a place for
learning. While both groups commented on the nature of learning as a “lifelong”
process, users were more likely to describe learning as something that is
“constant” or occurring “each day.” One user commented it was the “main reason
I come to the library.” An analysis of responses to the term “learning” during the
word association exercise indicates that the library as a place supports learning by
providing resources and creating a conducive place for learning (Table 5). Both
users and passers-by noted the importance of collections as sources for study, but
users were more likely to comment on the environment within the building. As
one stated, “The most important aspect of the library for me is that it is a playful
place. It redefines libraries and it links libraries to exploration.” The connection
between place learning is clearly recognized by the library’s users.
[Insert Table 5 about here]
A second emergent theme pertaining to learning involves the concept of
education as a public social good and the importance of providing the
opportunities for learning to the community. Respondents used terms such as
“necessary,” “fundamental,” “progressive,” “growing,” and “empowering” to
describe the library’s contribution to learning. One noted, “I think it provides the
opportunity for everyone in the city to attain individual growth.” Special emphasis
was placed on the importance of the library as a learning place for children, as
typified by one who stated, “For me and my children, it represents a learning tool


38
to give my children an opportunity for higher education. We couldn’t live without
it. They love school now.” In this quote, the notion of library as “tool” is again
illustrated. The concept of place for learning is closely tied to the concept of a
place for free access. One commented that the library provides “The opportunity
to improve yourself at no charge. A free public education.”
Informants were highly vocal in how they emphasized the need for “free”
access. When asked whether the library building was worth the cost, the
overwhelming majority responded affirmatively and used terms such as
“bargain,” “opportunity,” and “free” to explain their reasoning. As one participant
concisely stated, “It is less than the cost of buying books each year.” Reasons for
justifying cost fell into three categories: assisting people with low income,
personal savings, and cost effectiveness for the community. First, many observed
the importance of free access promoting equity in the community, especially for
the economically disadvantaged. Statement such as “Poor people can use the
Internet,” and “Everyone can have a membership,” exemplify this concern.
Another responded to questions about cost by saying, “A society without public
libraries is going nowhere.” Social good, above and beyond personal benefit, is
perceived as a core value in favor of spending on libraries. Others voiced a
second, more pragmatic rationale explaining that the library saved them much
more than it cost in terms of purchasing books and movies. As one person
observed, “Books and movies are expensive,” and users and passers-by alike
identified the trade-off of borrowing versus purchasing items for oneself. This
was recognized most clearly by those who also expressed a large appetite, as one


39
who stated, “I like to read fiction, but if I bought all the new romances, it would
burn a hole in my pocket...I’m very grateful that membership at the library is
free.” A third argument was voiced by those who suggested the cost was “cheap”
in comparison other public expenditures, such as the amount spent on a sports
stadium or the proposed monorail project aimed to improve public transportation.
Others noted that they “spend more on lattes” each week than the estimated per
person annual cost of building the new library.
The most common criticism related to cost pertained to hours of operation.
Rather than decrease the quality of service or reduce levels of staffing, the Seattle
Public Library has addressed past cuts in the operating budget by closing all
facilities for two weeks each year (once in winter and once in spring). A small
number of informants suggested that the library should have increased hours
rather than build a new facility. These observations may be naïve given that the
cost of construction came from bond funds rather than operating funds, but such
comments do indicate that the closures have the desirable effect of making budget
cuts visible to a public who keenly desires more services and access, and feels the
temporary loss.
Discussion
At the outset of this paper we introduced two frameworks for
understanding libraries—SPL specifically—as “place”: Oldenburg’s notion of the
third place and Creswell’s five component lens. Conceptually we found that that
both frameworks served their primary purpose of orienting us towards our


40
research phenomenon, meaning they helped us understand nuances among
different cognate terms such as “place,” “space” and “landscape.” Along this
vein, they also provided initial insights into how data analysis might be
approached. We now return to these frameworks to discuss how well they served
in these capacities and how we potentially enriched them in the course of this
research.
Oldenburg’s third place framework, which, as noted, has been cited
severally by LIS researchers but not applied in-depth, was of primary interest for
its focus on the social aspects of libraries as place. While we heartedly agree that
libraries are a veritable and necessary social good, our data did not support all of
Oldenburg’s eight propositions in establishing libraries, at least SPL, as a third
place. Thus, in answer to the broad question “is the SPL Central Building a third
place?” results from our study suggest that while it may be a third place in spirit,
it fully meets few of Oldenburg’s criteria. For example, while our data supports
the following assertions:
• Occurs on neutral ground where “individuals may come and go as they
please, in which none are required to play host, and in which all feel at
home and comfortable;”
• Be levelers, inclusive places that are “accessible to the general public and
does not set formal criteria of membership and exclusion” and thus


41
promote the expansion of social networks where people interact with
others who do no comprise their nearest and dearest;
• Are a home away from home, the places where people can be likely found
when not at home or at work, “though a radically different kind of setting
from home, the third place is remarkably similar to a good home in the
psychological comfort and support that it extends;”
the following criteria or propositions were not born out (or partially at best) by
our analysis:
• Have conversation as the main activity—while conversation occurs freely,
it is not the central activity featured at SPL notwithstanding the library’s
efforts at facilitating conversation via its 3rd floor living room and other
communal areas;
• One may go alone and be assured of finding an acquaintance – while
groups may meet at the library, visitors cannot always expect to find a
friend or acquaintance, especially given the sheer size and complexity of
the building;
• Have “regulars” or “fellow customers” who nurture conviviality and trust
with newcomers – Persons may frequent the library and get to know others


42
who regularly visit at the same time, but little or no special outreach is
made to the new visitor.
• Keep a low, unimpressive profile as a physical structure – Koolhaus, the
architect, intended to make a bold statement with the design of the
structure, and the visitor is meant to experience the physical nature of the
building and as well as use the library’s resources;
• Have a persistent playful, playground sort of mood – users clearly
indicated the serious nature of the work and learning they performed in the
library, and while some commented that the place was fun or playful, the
mood was one of productivity, study, and reflectin.
While our analysis of the SPL Central Building does not support the third place
propositions, it is consistent with other third place characteristics that Oldenburg
notes as offering such personal benefits as novelty, perspective, spiritual tonic,
and friendship via its collection, staff, services and clientele. Additionally SPL
was highly viewed by our respondents as a societal good in terms of its political
role, habit of association, recreational spirit, and importance “in securing the
public domain for the use and enjoyment of decent people” [36, p. 83]. We found
little evidence, other than the odd respondent who felt that the homeless should be
barred from the library, that SPL harbors such negative third place characteristics
as s segregation, isolation or hostility. In this sense, our analysis also supports


43
Putnam and Feldstein’s [39] observation that libraries foster social capital,
meaning they facilitate human relationships via trust and understanding and hence
nurture community. More significantly, we found that SPL supports two distinct
forms of social capital: bonding and bridging because in addition to linking
together people of similar ilk they also promote diversity by assembling people of
different types—themes that echo Putnam and Feldstein’s observations of the
Chicago Public Library’s Near North Branch. Given the misfit between
Oldenburg’s framework and the SPL central building, we ask to what degree
might the framework better account for the nature of a library branch? In other
words, might the smaller scale and tighter cohesiveness of a branch library make
it more fully reflect the attributes of a third place? According to Oldenburg,
bookstores fit the bill as a third place [40], so why not a branch library?
Our second framework, Cresswell’s five-part definition of “place” was
useful for helping clarify the differences among overlapping terms. Using this
framework, responses can be classified as follows:
Location – This concept was of particular interest given the history of the site
being used for the downtown Central Library for over the century. Respondents
confirmed the importance of the location in terms of ease of accessibility and
prominence in the heart of the city. The site is well situated for low income
residents who were recognized as primary beneficiaries of the services,
collections, and technology.


44
Locale – The variety of the settings within the structure accommodate a range of
user’s needs and purposes, including interacting with others or individual efforts.
Users frequently commented on material features (plants, lights, furniture, coffee
stand, colors, etc.) as they related to the activities they were conducting.
Sense of Place – Respondents expressed a range of feelings and emotions that
they associated with the building, specific structural features, collections, and the
importance of the library in their own lives.
Space – Cresswell’s discussion of space helped differentiate our understanding of
place, but does not apply to the analysis of individual responses concerning the
Central Library as a single place.
Landscape – Respondents shared their thoughts and feelings regarding how the
Central Library fits into the greater topography of the city and the downtown area.
Both Cresswell’s framework, like Oldenburg’s, is a useful lens for understanding
the roles of libraries within society. Neither, however, adequately addresses the
concept of information as it figures in the broader notion of place. While
information may be loosely equated with “conversation” in Oldenburg’s
framework and “books” may be regarded as part of “locale” or material setting in
Cresswell’s terms, neither framework explicitly incorporates information seeking
and consumption as a core aspect of place. Thus the current study may contribute


45
to the foregoing frameworks by adding “information” to the repertoire of place
since we operationalized “informational place” as comprising all themes
regarding information finding and seeking, life-long learning, learning resources,
and learning environment.
Beyond extending past research on the roles that libraries play in people’s
lives and the values ascribed to them by employing a strong place-based
framework, our study was timed to occur a few months after the opening of the
new SPL Central Building (an unprecedented effort in library design and hence
unique opportunity for field research), and it examined the perceptions of both
users and passer-bys in addition employing the free association—a population and
method rarely included in past studies. In a forthcoming paper we share our
findings from an in-depth analysis of our knowledge organization data,
particularly regarding the book spiral. Notwithstanding the usefulness of several
past analyses of library buildings, we did not uncover published studies that
address the effectiveness of the physical arrangement of materials in libraries.
Given the unique characteristics of the internal space at the SPL Central Library,
exploring the effectiveness of shelving nonfiction materials using a continuous
run of call numbers as a means of organizing knowledge may shed new light upon
patterns of library use. In future research we will expand our study by
interviewing SPL staff about their thoughts and feelings towards the new SPL
building as place; we may also apply our study design to understanding the views
of various stakeholders towards new SPL branch libraries. This would be of


46
particular interest for determining whether branches exhibit more third place
characteristics as hypothesized from the results of the current study.


47
Appendix A: Interview Schedule for Library Users
“Seattle Public Library as Place” Research Study
[Interview script for LIBRARY USERS]
The Information School, University of Washington
Interviewer: ___________________________ Date: ___________
Tally the number of individuals who declined to participate at this location:
Location (mark one): Day (circle one):
Su Mo Tu We Th Fr Sa
◘ Fiction (3rd floor)
◘ Children’s Room (1st floor) Start Time:___________
◘ World Languages (1st floor)
◘ Mixing Chamber (5th floor) End Time: ___________
◘ Book Spiral
Sex (circle one): Male Female
Hello! My name is {xxxxx}. I’m from the University of Washington. I’m
asking people what they think about the new library building. I have a few
questions that will take about 10-15 minutes as explained in this information
sheet, which includes the names of contacts in case you have any future
questions about this project. All questions are optional. As thanks, you will
get a coupon for a free Latte at Starbucks. Would you like to participate?


48
1. How long have you been visiting the Central Library, either the new or the old
building? {years or months}
2. How often do you visit this library? {Record verbatim response; code AFTER
interview}
◘ Daily ◘ 2-3 times per month ◘ First time
◘ 2-6 times per week ◘ Once per month
◘ Once per week ◘ Less than once per month
[Questions 3-5 were included in the interview guide per the request of Seattle
Public Library and were directed toward service use and patron satisfaction. They
are excluded here to conserve space.]
6. Is this building your local branch? {Yes / No}
[if NO] Was your main reason for coming downtown to visit the Central
Library?
7. What do you think of the new building? {Open-ended response}
8. How do you feel this building fits with downtown Seattle? {Open-ended
response}
9. What do you like the most about this building? {Open-ended response}


49
10. What do you like least about this building? {Open-ended response}
11. Do you usually come by yourself? {Yes / No}
[if NO, skip to second prompt associated with question 12]
12. Do you ever come with other people? {Yes / No}
[if YES] Who do you come with? For any particular reason? {Open-ended
response}
13. Do you ever come to do things for other people? {Yes / No}
[if YES] Who have you done this for? What have you done for them?
Why? {Open-ended response}
14. Have you ever come to a public presentation at this building? {Yes / No}
[if YES] Which ones? {Open-ended response}
15. Have you ever used this library to do something for work? {Yes / No}
[if YES] What sorts of things have you done for work? {Open-ended
response}
16. How would you find a book without asking a librarian or using the computer?
{Open-ended response}


50
17. In general, libraries arrange their books in several ways. Can you describe
how the books are physically arranged and organized in this library?
{Open-ended response}
18. In this new building, some books are organized in a spiral. Do you think this
helps you locate what you need? How? {Open-ended response}
19. I’m going to read you a list of words related to this library. Please say the first
thoughts that enter your mind. {Open-ended responses}
a) Reading e) Technology
b) Free Speech f) Librarians
c) Learning g) Books
d) Community h) Architecture
20. In summary, what does this library mean to you? {Open-ended response}
21. For this building, 152 million dollars of the cost was financed by a 25 year
municipal bond. This makes the cost of the building about $10 per person
a year for the people of Seattle. Do you feel this building was worth the
cost? Why or why not?
22. Is there anything you would like the City Librarian or Board of Trustees to
know about the services or design of the new Central Library? {Open
ended response}


51
Now I’d like to ask you a few quick questions about yourself.
23. What is your age? {Open-ended response}
24. What is your occupation? {Open-ended response}
25. Did you go to college? {Yes / No}
[if NO] Are you a high school graduate? {Yes / No}
[if YES] What is your highest degree attained? {Open-ended response}
26. What is your ethnicity? {Open-ended response}
27. What is the primary language spoken in the home? {Open-ended response}
28. Is your household income above or below $50,000? {Above / Below}
[if NO] Is it above or below $30,000? {Above / Below}
[if YES] Is it above or below $75,000? {Above / Below}
29. Do you live in Seattle? {Yes / No}
[if NO] Do you live in King County? {Yes / No}
30. Do you have a Seattle Public Library card? {Yes / No}


52
[At this point, the participant was handed a printed satisfaction survey created by
Seattle Public Library staff.]
Thank you for answering my questions. Here is a coupon for your free Latte.
Thanks again!


53
Appendix B: Interview Schedule for Passers-by
“Seattle Public Library as Place” Research Study
[Interview script for PASSERS-BY]
The Information School, University of Washington
Interviewer: ___________________________ Date: ___________
Tally the number of individuals who declined to participate at this location:
Location (mark one): Day (circle one):
Su Mo Tu We Th Fr Sa
◘ NE corner
◘ SE corner Start Time:___________
◘ SW corner
◘ NW corner End Time: ___________
Sex (circle one): Male Female
Hello! My name is {xxxxx}. I’m from the University of Washington. I’m
asking people what they think about the new library building. I have a few
questions that will take about 10-15 minutes as explained in this information
sheet, which includes the names of contacts in case you have any future
questions about this project. All questions are optional. As thanks, you will
get a coupon for a free Latte at Starbucks. Would you like to participate?


54
1. How often do you walk by this building?
◘ Daily ◘ 2-3 times per month ◘ First time
◘ 2-6 times per week ◘ Once per month
◘ Once per week ◘ Less than once per month
2. What do you think of this new building? {Open-ended response}
3. How do you feel this building fits with downtown Seattle? {Open-ended
response}
4. What do you like most about this building? {Open-ended response}
5. What do you like least about this building? {Open-ended response}
6. I’m going to read you a list of words related to this library. Please say the first
thoughts that enter your mind. {Open-ended responses}
a) Reading e) Technology
b) Free Speech f) Librarians
c) Learning g) Books
d) Community h) Architecture
7. In summary, what does this library mean to you? {Open-ended response}


55
8. For this building, 152 million dollars of the cost was financed by a 25 year
municipal bond. This makes the cost of the building about $10 per person a year
for the people of Seattle. Do you feel this building was worth the cost? Why or
why not?
9. Do you have any other comments about the library? {Open-ended response}
10. Have you ever used this library? {Yes / No}
[if YES] What have you used it for? {Open-ended response}
To finish, I have a few quick questions.
11. What is your age? {Open-ended response}
12. What is your occupation? {Open-ended response}
13. Did you go to college? {Yes / No}
[if NO] Are you a high school graduate? {Yes / No}
[if YES] What is your highest degree attained? {Open-ended response}
14. What is your ethnicity? {Open-ended response}
15. What is the primary language spoken in the home? {Open-ended response}


56
16. Is your household income above or below $50,000? {Above / Below}
[if NO] Is it above or below $30,000? {Above / Below}
[if YES] Is it above or below $75,000? {Above / Below}
17. Do you have a Seattle Public Library card? {Yes / No}
[At this point, the participant was handed a printed satisfaction survey created by
Seattle Public Library staff.]
Thank you for answering my questions. Here is a coupon for your free Latte.
Thanks again!


57
References
[1.] Relph, Edward. Place and Placelessness. London: Pion, 1976.
[2.] Feld, Steven, and Basso, Keith H., eds. Senses of Place. Santa Fe, N.M.:
School of American Research Press; Seattle, Wash.: dist. by University of
Washington Press, 1996.
[3.] Lippard, Lucy R. Lure of the Local: Sense of Place in a Multicentered
Society. New York: New Press, 1997.
[4.] Curry, Ann; Dunbar, Denise; George, Ellen; and Marshall, Diana. “Public
Library Branch Design: The Public Speaks!” Paper presented at the Canadian
Library Association/British Columbia Library Association Joint Annual
Conference, Victoria, B.C., June 16-19, 2004.
[5.] Allen, Frank R., and Watstein, Sarah Barbara. "Point/Counterpoint: The
Value of Place." College and Research Libraries News 57 (June 1996): 372-3,
383.
[6.] Ginsburg, Judith Renee. "Placemaking: Case Study of How Participants
Understand the Design, Development, and Function of an Academic Library."
Ph.D. diss., University of Oregon, 1997.
[7.] Albanese, Andrew Richard. “Deserted no More.” Library Journal 128, no. 7
(April 15, 2003): 34-36.
[8.] Shill, Harold B., and Tonner, Shawn. "Creating a Better Place: Physical
Improvements in Academic Libraries, 1995-2002." College & Research Libraries
64 (November 2003): 431-466.


58
[9.] Engel, Debra, and Antell, Karen. “The Life of the Mind: A Study of Faculty
Spaces in Academic Libraries.” College & Research Libraries 65, no. 1 (January
2004): 8-26.
[10.] Weise, Frieda. "Being There: The Library as Place." Journal of the Medical
Library Association 92 (January 2004): 6-13.
[11.] Wagner, Gulten S. "Public Library Buildings: A Semiotic Analysis.” Journal
of Librarianship and Information Science 24 (June 1992): 101-108.
[12.] Gosling, William. "To Go or Not to Go? Library as Place." American
Libraries 31, no.11 (November 2000): 44-45.
[13.] St. Lifer, Evan. "What Public Libraries Must Do to Survive." Library
Journal 126, no. 6 (April 1, 2001): 60-62.
[14.] Demas, Sam, and Scherer, Jeffery. “Esprit de Place: Maintaining and
Designing Library Buildings to Provide Transcendent Spaces.” American
Libraries 33, no. 4 (April 2002): 65-68.
[15.] McKinney, William Allen. “Policy and Power: The Role of the
Neighborhood Library in the Community and the Forces that Add to or Detract
from its Efficacy.” Ph.D. diss., Temple University, 2002.
[16.] Ranseen, Emily. “The Library As Place: Changing Perspectives.” Library
Administration & Management 16, no. 4 (Fall 2002): 203-207.
[17.] Sannwald, William. “To Build or Not to Build.” Library Administration &
Management 15, no. 3 (Summer 2001): 155-60.


59
[18.] Alstad, Colleen, and Curry, Ann. "Public Space, Public Discourse, and
Public Libraries." LIBRES: Library and Information Science Research Electronic
Journal 13, no. 1 (March 2003).
[19.] Bryson, Jared; Usherwood, Bob; and London, Richard Proctor. “Libraries
Must Also Be Buildings? New Library Impact Study. Centre for Public Libraries
and Information in Society (CPLIS), (March 2003): 1-129. Museum, Libraries,
and Archives Council, Available online:
http://www.mla.gov.uk/information/publications/00pubs.asp (accessed July 1,
2004).
[20.] Bundy, Alan. "Places of Connection: New Public and Academic Library
Buildings in Australia and New Zealand." Australasian Public Libraries and
Information Services 16 (March 2004): 32-47.
[21.] Wood, Mark, et al. “Better Public Libraries.” Commission for Architecture
and the Built Environment (CABE), (2003): 1-17. Museum, Libraries, and
Archives Council, http://www.mla.gov.uk/documents/id874rep.pdf. (accessed
July 1, 2004).
[22.] Worpole, Ken. “21st Century Libraries: Changing Forms, Changing
Futures.” Report for the Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment
and the Council for Museums, Archives and Libraries, 2003.
[23.] Crumpacker, Sara. “The School Library as Place.” Wilson Library Bulletin
69, no. 1 (September 1994): 23-25.
[24.] Alki 15, no.3 (December 1999).


60
[25.] Augst, Thomas. “American Libraries and Agencies of Culture.” American
Studies 42 (Fall 2001): 5-22.
[26.] Thomas, Nancy Pickering. “Reading Libraries: An Interpretive Study of
Discursive Practices in Library Architecture and the Interactional Construction of
Personal Identity.” Ph.D. diss., Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
1996.
[27.] Block, Marylaine. “How to Become a Great Public Space.” American
Libraries 34 (April 2003): 72-76.
[28.] Durrance, Joan C., and Fisher, Karen E. How Libraries and Librarians Help:
A Guide to Identifying User-Centered Outcomes. Chicago: American Library
Association, 2005.
[29.] Kranich, Nancy, ed. Libraries and Democracy: The Cornerstones of Liberty.
Chicago: American Library Association, 2001.
[30.] Molz, Redmond Kathleen, and Dain, Phyllis. Civic Space/Cyberspace: The
American Public Library in the Information Age. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
1999.
[31.] Fisher, Karen E.; Durrance, Joan C.; and Hinton, Marian Bouch. Information
Grounds and the Use of Need-based Services by Immigrants in Queens, New
York: A Context-based, Outcome Evaluation Approach.” Journal of the American
Society for Information Science & Technology 55, no. 8 (May 2004): 754-766.
[32.] Pettigrew [Fisher], Karen E. “Waiting for Chiropody: Contextual Results
from an Ethnographic Study of the Information Behavior Among Attendees at


61
Community Clinics.” Information Processing and Management 35 (1999): 801
817.
[33.] Wiegand, Wayne A. “To Reposition a Research Agenda: What American
Studies Can Teach the LIS Community About the Library in the Life of the
User.” Library Quarterly 73 (October 2003): 369-382.
[34.] Gorman, Michael. Our Enduring Values: Librarianship in the 21st Century.
Chicago: American Library Association, 2000.
[35.] Leckie, Gloria J., and Hopkins, Jeffrey. “The Public Place of Central
Libraries: Findings from Toronto and Vancouver.” Library Quarterly 72 (July
2002): 326-372.
[36.] Oldenburg, Ray. The Great Good Place: Cafes, Coffee Shops, Bookstores,
Bars, Hair Salons, and other Hangouts at the Heart of a Community. New York:
Marlowe, 1999.
[37.] McCook, Kathleen de la Pena. Introduction to Public Librarianship. New
York: Neal-Schuman, 2004.
[38.] Creswell, Tim. Place: A Short Introduction. Malden, Mass.: Blackwell,
2004.
[39.] Putnam, Robert D., and Feldstein, Lewis M. Better Together: Restoring the
American Community. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2003.
[40.] Oldenburg, Ray. Celebrating the Third Place: Inspiring Stories about the
“Great Good Places” at the Heart of our Communities. New York: Marlowe,
2002.


62
[41.] Preer, Jean. Where are Libraries in Bowling Alone? American Libraries, 32,
no. 8 (August 2001): 60-63.
[42.] Putnam, Robert D. Bowling Alone: Collapse and Revival of American
Community. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2000.
[43.] Agnew, John. Place and Politics: The Geographical Mediation of State and
Society. Boston: Allen and Unwin, 1987.
[44.] Ward, Jacob. “The Making of a Library: The Research.” Metropolis 24, no.
2 (October 2004): 98-141.
[45.] Seattle Public Library. (2004). “The Seattle Public Library: Floor-by-Floor
Highlights.” Available online
http://www.spl.org/default.asp?pageID=branch_central_floors_detail&branchID=
1.
[46.] Wheat, Leonard. Free Associations to Common Words: A Study of Word
Associations to Twenty-Five Words Picked at Random from the Five Hundred
Most Commonly Used Words in the English Language. New York: Teachers
College, Columbia University, 1931.
[47.] Nelson, Douglas; McEvoy, Cathy; and Dennis, Simon. “What is Free
Association and What does it Measure?” Memory & Cognition 28, no. 6
(September 2000): 887-899.
[48.] Crosland, Harold. The Psychological Methods of Word-Association and
Reaction-time as Tests of Deception. Eugene, Ore.: University of Oregon Press,
1929.


63
[49.] Siipola, Elsa; Walker, Nanette; and Kolb, Dorothy. “Task Attitudes in Word
Association, Projective and Nonprojective.” Journal of Personality 23 (1955):
441-459.
[50.] Bilodeau, Edward, and Howell, David. Free Association Norms by Discrete
and Continued Methods. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,
1965.
[51.] Cramer, Phebe. Word Association. New York: Academic Press, 1968.
[52.] Gerow, Joshua. “Instructional set and Word Association Test (WAT)
Responses of Children and Adults.” Journal of Genetic Psychology 130, no. 2
(June 1977): 247-254.
[53.] Szalay, Lor, and Deese, James. Subjective Meaning and Culture: An
Assessment through Word Associations. Hillsdale, N. J.: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 1978.
[54.] Mefferd, Roy Jr. “Word Association: Response Behavior and Stimulus
Words.” Psychological Reports 45, no. 3 (1979): 763-767.
[55.] Silverstein, Marshall, and Harrow, Martin. “Word Association: Multiple
Measures and Multiple Meanings.” Journal of Clinical Psychology 39, no. 4 (July
1983): 467-470.
[56.] Craighead, W. Edward, and Nemeroff. The Corsini Encyclopedia of
Psychology and Behavioral Science. New York: Wiley, 2001.
[57.] U.S. Census. American Community Survey. 2003.


64
[58.] McKechnie, Lynn, and McKenzie, Pam. “The Young Child / Adult
Caregiver Storytime Program as Information Ground.” Library Research Seminar
III, Kansas City, Kansas, October 15, 2004.


65
Footnotes
1 We wish to thank the Seattle Public Library (SPL) Foundation for supporting
this study through providing participant compensation. We also wish to thank
SPL staff Deborah Jacobs, Michele D’Allesandro, Andra Addision, and Lois
Fenker for their invaluable assistance, and especially our MLIS student assistants:
Peter Cole, Tom Dobrowolsky, Grace Fitzgerald, Betha Gutsche, Robyn Hagle,
Sumi Hayashi, Carol Landry, Sarah Merner, Anne Miller, Hannah Parker,
Jennifer Peterson, Christopher Rieber, and Kristen Shuyler.
2 The Information School, University of Washington, Box 352840, Seattle, WA 98105-2840.
3 As Jean Preer astutely lamented [41], Putnam omitted libraries from his 2000
popular monograph Bowling Alone: Collapse and Revival of American
Community [42] —an oversight he corrected after discussion with library
professionals at the 2001 annual ALA meeting by including the Chicago Public
Library as a case study in his 2003 book with Feldstein [39] in which he discusses
the importance of branch libraries in bringing people together and enabling access
to electronic information across the digital divide.
4 Extensive illustrations and photographs of the new SPL Central Library are
provided in the October 2004 issue of Metropolis.


66
5 The majority of the nonfiction collection—75 percent of the entire collection
is located on the Book Spiral. This allows the nonfiction collection to be housed
in one continuous run, and avoids the problem of having to move books into other
rooms or floors when various subject areas expand. The spiral is an architectural
organization that allows all patrons—including people with disabilities—the
freedom to move throughout the entire collection without depending on stairs,
escalators and elevators. Book shelves are not filled to capacity, so there is room
for the collection to grow. ... Escalator and elevator stops are labeled with Dewey
Decimal System numbers corresponding to materials on each floor. In addition,
floor mats throughout the Books Spiral highlight Dewey Decimal numbers that
match nearby books stacks [45].
6 Numerous other works such as Crosland [48]; Siipola, Walker and Kolb [49];
Bilodeau and Howell [50]; Cramer [51]; Gerow [52]; Szalay and Deese [53];
Mefferd [54]; Silverstein and Harros [55]; and Craighead and Memeroff [56] also
provide guidance in the selection and analysis of free association terms.
7 The term “sponsorship” was eliminated from the free association exercise
because participants had difficulties formulating responses.


67
Table 1: Sample of Reponses from Word Association – Architecture
USERS PASSERS-BY
Positive
Adventuresome
Amazing
Artistic
Beautiful
Brilliant
Crazy (good)
Delightful
Funky! It’s free spirited
Futuristic
Inviting
It fits in
Liberating
Modern
Outstanding
Spectacular
Tripping
Unique
Very sharp
Wonderful
Amazing
Beautiful
Creative
Cutting edge
Daring
Discovering
Exciting
Eye catching
Fantastic
Fascinating
Form of art
Functional
Hope
Inspiring
Stimulating
Striking
Superb
Unique
World class
Negative
Brutalism
Funny looking
A freak
Atrocious


68
Futuristic
Ingenuous
Overblown
Striking
Ugly
Unfinished
Dangerous
Egotistic
Expensive
Imposing


69
Table 2: Reasons that People Come to SPL with Other People
Reasons that People Come to SPL with Other People
• Part of looking after children who are not in school
• To use the computers/Internet
• To look for books, magazines, movies (kids have a bigger selection than
at branches)
• To read to children
• To go to an activity such as baby story time
• So kids can work on school projects
• Friends come together to work on projects, do research (e.g., genealogy)
• For “transportation practice”
• To date or to study
• To visit/socialize
• To have lunch together, run errands
• Part of site seeing
• Parking is easier
• To translate for someone who speaks/reads English poorly


70
Table 3: Sample of Reponses from Word Association – Community
USERS PASSERS-BY
Bookmobile—old people need it
Caring
Comforting
Cooperation
Diversified
Easy to be included
Essential
Extended family
Friendship
Fun
Gathering spot
Getting involved
Good for it
Important
It’s free
Keep the homeless out
More than the old building
Not enough of it—just moved here
Reflects it well
Service oriented
Belonging
Comforting
Diverse
Essential
Everybody meets here
Excellent
Falls short
Family
Fits the need
Good, clean environment
Heterogeneous
Improvement
Involvement
Meeting place
Networking
Not conducive
Perfect
Reaching out
Togetherness
Uniting
Village


71
Table 4: Sample of Reponses from Word Association – Librarian
USERS PASSERS-BY
Accessible
Advice
Available
Concierge
Distanced
Don’t know any
Don’t see them much
Educated
Enjoy their job
Family
Friendly
Fun, enthusiastic
Glasses
Good vocation
Helpful
I don’t talk to them
I have no contact
Intelligent
Keep abreast
Knowledge
Nancy Pearl
1st floor
Aid searching
Conservative
Courteous
Cute
Fabulous
Friendly
Geeky
Glasses
Helpful
I don’t deal with them
Indispensable
Invisible
Ladies
Mentor
My wife’s one! Lovely people
Nice
Old
Open
Paperwork
Proud


72
Nice/Kind
Not enough
Not strolling
Patron oriented
Person behind the desk
Pleasant, polite
Police
Quiet
Resourceful
Scarce, hiding, don’t see them
Searching
Smart
Square
Stuffy
Teacher
They all have the microphones
Women
Wonderful
Reference
Smart
Very important
Very knowledgeable
Wonderful


73
Table 5: Sample of Reponses from Word Association – Learning
USERS PASSERS-BY
Life-long
Learning
All the time
Can’t stop
Continuation
Non-stop
Constant
Each day
Endless
I learn something new every
day
Always
Continuous
Growing
Lifelong
Fundamental
Progressive
Learning
Resources
Books
Computers
Storing information
The technology helps
Abundant
Reading
Study
Books
Computers are excellent
Hands-on
Research
Lots of avenues for it
Learning
Environment
Environment
Efficient
Facilitated
Ideal situation
Accessibility
Encouraged
Inviting
Easy


74
It’s conducive to learning
That’s why I come
Very useful place
Quietness
What libraries are for


75
Figure 1: Seattle Public Library
