Honey Heist by Grant Howitt
“Honey Heist is a surprisingly successful one-page RPG. Here is the plot: 1) You have a complex plan that requires precise timing. 2) You are a GODDAMN BEAR.
That's largely it. It's easy to run and easy to play, and there's a D8 table for hats if you want to be a bear that wears a hat, and who doesn't want that?”
Watch the VOD of this session here: https://www.twitch.tv/collections/tpuBAP2vGhcF7A The Game Honey Heist by Grant Howitt The Creator
● Grant Howitt’s Twitter How to Play
● Learn How to Play Honey Heist in 7 mins | Gamemaster Guide Roll20 Actual Plays
● Grant Howitt's Honey Heist holiday special! | RPG playthrough episode 1 of 3 ● Marisha's Honey Heist | Critical Role RPG One-Shot Play Alikes ● Blades in the Dark by John Harper ● Fiasco by Bully Pulpit Games ● City of Mist by Son of Oak Read Alikes:

● River of Teeth by Sarah Gailey ● The Ruin of Angels by Max Gladstone ● Six of Crows by Leigh Bardugo ● The Feather Thief by Kirk Wallace Johnson ● The Gardner Heist by Ulrich Boser
Watch Alikes ● The Oceans Movie Series ● Now You See Me ● Leverage ● Lupin III ● Baccano ● Great Pretender
Safety Tools ● Script Change by Beau Jágr Sheldon ● The Door is Open by Eirik Fatland ○ Blog by Lizzie Stark ○ Blog 2 by Eirik Fatland ● TTRPG Safety Toolkit collected by Kienna Shaw and Lauren Bryant-Monk ○ TTRPG Safety Toolkit Guide ○ Google Drive
Game RT Twitch Policy 1. Be kind and respectful to one another 2. Hate speech of any type will not be tolerated 3. We reserve the right to remove anyone from the chat for any reason 4. If you are feeling harassed by anyone, please notify a GameRT twitch mod and one of us will assist you 5. If you'd rather talk privately about anything, please send us a direct message
Learn More About GameRT Blog: bit.ly/GameRTBlog Facebook: bit.ly/GameRTLeague & bit.ly/GameRTFacebook Resources: bit.ly/GameRTPublicResources Website: bit.ly/GameRTWebsite Questions? Email gamert@ala.org
Stream Summary Tech Check on Twitch then Go Time! Part 1: Intro and Rules Part 2: Actual Play Part 3: Discussion

