Vol.:(0123456789)
Publishing Research Quarterly (2021) 37:227–240
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12109-021-09810-z
1 3
Immersive Media and Books 2020: New Insights About 
Book Pirates, Libraries and Discovery, Millennials, 
and Cross‑Media Engagement: Before and During COVID
Rachel Noorda1 · Kathi Inman Berens1
Published online: 4 May 2021 
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2021
Abstract
Books exist within a connected media ecosystem, but few consumer behavior and 
experience studies capture the relationships between books and other media forms. 
In Immersive Media & Books 2020, Drs. Rachel Noorda and Kathi Inman Berens 
from Portland State University explore crossmedia consumer behavior for books, 
video games, and TV/movies—capturing behaviors both before and during COVID-
19. The highlights of the report are highly distributed word-of-mouth discovery, the 
importance of author brand and genre, avid book engagement of Black and Latinx 
millennials, context-agnostic book discovery, cross-media engagement and discov -
ery, multidimensional identities and behaviors of book pirates, multitasking as a fea-
ture of contemporary book consumption, and libraries as tools of discovery.
Keywords Avid book engagers · Crossmedia · Book piracy · Diverse readers · 
Nonwhite readers · Immersive media · Survey · TV · Movies · Games
Introduction
Immersive Media & Books 2020 examines consumer behavior and engagement for 
books, video games, and TV/movies. It presents granular demographic data along 
three age groups (millennial, Gen X, and baby boomer), five U.S. regions (Mid-
west, Southwest, West, Northeast, Southeast), seven racial/ethnic groups (Afri-
can American or Black; Asian American or Asian; European American or white; 
Hawaii Native or Pacific Islander; Latino, Latina or Latinx; Middle Eastern or North 
 * Rachel Noorda 
 rnoorda@pdx.edu
 Kathi Inman Berens 
 kberens@pdx.edu
1 Department of English, Portland State University, PO Box 751, Portland, OR 97207-0751, USA

228 Publishing Research Quarterly (2021) 37:227–240
1 3
African; Native American, First Nations, or Native Alaskan), and gender. These 
findings are based on survey data collected in September and November 2020.
Immersive Media & Books 2020 was published in February 2021 by Panorama 
Project, an organization centered on library research, and written by scholars at 
Portland State University, Drs. Rachel Noorda and Kathi Inman Berens. The two 
main goals of the study were to establish the place of books in the media ecosystem 
and understand the role of libraries in that ecosystem. This article summarizes the 
report’s key findings.
Terminology: Book Engagement and Immersion
One of the key contributions of Immersive Media & Books 2020 is its specific use 
of the terminology “book engagement”, defined as “buying, borrowing, subscribing 
to, reading or gifting a printed book, an ebook, or audiobook in part or in whole.” 
To capture the wide range of things people do with books, survey respondents were 
asked how many books they engaged per month, rather than how many books they 
read or bought. This was done in order to capture data beyond just avid readers or 
those who buy books. Book engagement includes a wide range of activities: check -
ing out books from the library (and not necessarily reading them), giving books as 
gifts, discovering books via other media such as video games or films and TV, buy -
ing books but not reading them, buying books for purposes other than reading (col-
lecting and displaying, for example), and buying books for school/work or hobbies. 
To gather data only about avid readers or book buyers would render invisible the 
many ways people engage with books. Capturing data beyond the “typical” reader 
or buyer as white female baby boomers who are reading or buying for entertainment 
gives a more accurate picture of the book engagement landscape in the United States 
in 2020. Who is engaging and what counts as engagement is a foundational piece of 
Immersive Media & Books 2020.
Additionally, the report takes a wide approach to the term “immersive.” Past 
discussions of book engagement have tended to claim book engagement as distinct 
from other media forms because of its immersive qualities, and the required dedi-
cation to deep, uninterrupted concentration. But Immersive Media & Books 2020 
shows that this is not true; books do not necessitate more concentrated or uninter -
rupted attention than other longform media like TV/movies and games. For exam-
ple, the survey data shows that multitasking is a common feature of modern book 
engagement: 61% of ebook readers and 70% of audiobook listeners said that they 
were multitasking when engaging with these book forms. 53% of millennials report 
multitasking while reading printed books. Therefore, Immersive Media & Books 
2020 approaches “immersion” as a descriptor of the deep involvement people expe-
rience in the topic and/or storyworld. “Immersive” is a feature of longform storytell-
ing, not a state of human attention. A person may engage an immersive world with 
full or partial attention. The data support a more nuanced view of how entertainment 
products and formats feed different types of attention.

229
1 3Publishing Research Quarterly (2021) 37:227–240 
Methods and Limitations
Immersive Media & Books 2020 utilizes a survey methodology to study consumer 
behavior and engagement. This information informs the report’s analysis of how 
book buying, borrowing, discovery and consumption existed before the pandemic, 
and shifted during and because of it. The sample size for the survey was 4314, and 
the data was collected in September and November 2020. Respondents answered 
“yes” to a screening question about engaging with at least one book in the last 
twelve months. Because of this screening question, it is estimated that the survey 
captures the behaviors of at least 75% of Americans because, according to a 2019 
Pew research study, 75% of Americans have read a book in the last year [10]. Immer-
sive Media & Books 2020 likely represents even more than 75% of the U.S. popula-
tion because it captured the broader activity of book “engagement” rather than the 
narrower Pew research activity of “reading.” The Immersive Media & Books survey 
had a 95% confidence level, 1.5% margin of error, and 61.8% incident rate.
Quotas for age, race, gender, and region were enforced in the sample during 
collection to ensure that the survey was representative of and aligned with the 
most current U.S. Census data. The survey respondents proportionally match 
demographics of the U.S. bookselling regions (West, Southwest, Midwest, North-
east, Southeast), ages (millennials, Gen X, baby boomers), and racial/ethnic cat-
egories to match the U.S. Census.
The respondents were recruited through Qualtrics, and quotas were pushed 
starting with the harder-to-reach target groups, starting with non-white respond-
ents, male respondents, and age quotas that were not filling as quickly. The length 
of the survey was approximately 15  min to encourage participation because 
research has found that the longer an online survey, the less likely respondents 
are to start and finish the survey [5 ]. The higher cost of administering a survey 
that takes longer than 15 min to complete was another constraint that limited the 
length of the survey. Constraint of time and survey space limited the number of 
questions asked. To minimize the risk of survey data reliance on self reporting 
(which can be subject to lying or misremembering), the questions were framed 
so that consumers don’t have to give exact numbers, which can be difficult to 
remember, and the researchers worked in collaboration with Qualtrics to scrub 
the data for screening bad responses.
Findings
The highlights of Immersive Media & Books 2020 are highly distributed word-of-
mouth discovery, the importance of author brand and genre, avid book engage-
ment of Black and Latinx millennials, context-agnostic book discovery, cross-
media engagement and discovery, multidimensional identities and behaviors of 
book pirates, multitasking as a feature of contemporary book consumption, and 
libraries as tools of discovery.

230 Publishing Research Quarterly (2021) 37:227–240
1 3
Highly Distributed Word‑of‑Mouth Discovery
Respondents find books primarily via word-of-mouth recommendations from family, 
friends, and social media. When asked to select one top preferred method of book 
discovery, respondents most selected (1) recommendations from friends 20.8%, (2) 
favorite author 15.3%, (3) recommendations from family 12.1% and (4) recommen-
dations on social media, such as Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, Reddit, YouTube, 
etc. 7.3%. However, even word-of-mouth book discovery is highly distributed. Of 
the 20 choices that respondents could select for their preferred choice of book dis-
covery, only 1/5th of respondents chose the top category: recommendations from 
friends. In other words, preference for book discovery methods is quite dispersed, 
indicating that there are many ways to reach audiences, dependent on more granular 
data about a book’s target audience and niche. Further research is needed to under -
stand more about how word-of-mouth is generated for book discovery. For example, 
people seem largely unaware of the role algorithms play in driving awareness either 
in opt-in spaces such as one’s own curated social media feed, and in places where 
one can’t opt out of algorithmic activity, such as in targeted ad placements inside 
e-commerce sites like Amazon.
The Importance of Author Brand and Genre
Author brand recurs frequently in the data as an important factor in the how , where 
and why of book discovery and purchase. Favorite author is the #2 preferred method 
of book discovery; in-person author events are the #3 preferred place of book dis-
covery. Author is the second-most important factor, after genre, motivating book 
purchase.
Certain subsections of the population rely on author brand for discovery more 
than others, particularly men, millennials, and Black and Latinx respondents. Men 
prefer in-person author events (15.8%) and virtual author events (6.1%) as places for 
discovery and rank author 27.2% for book purchase: these data all indicate higher 

231
1 3Publishing Research Quarterly (2021) 37:227–240 
degrees of author influence than is the case for women and the general survey pop-
ulation. Millennials discover books more via in-person author events (20.2%) and 
virtual author events (8.2%) than the general survey population. To a lesser extent 
than millennials but still greater than the general survey population, Gen X respond-
ents also discover more through in-person (17.5%) and virtual (7%) author events. 
Black and Latinx respondents also had greater proportions finding books through in-
person author events (20.6% for Black and 17.5% for Latinx) than the general survey 
population.
Far and away, genre/category was the most important factor influencing book 
purchase (39.8% of the general survey population). Surprisingly, price was a less 
important factor for book purchase than might be expected in the general population 
(9.2%); but this datum doesn’t capture the behavior of certain subgroups who don’t 
purchase a book, such as book pirates and those who get books for free through book 
giveaways. For those people, price may well be the most important consideration.
Avid Book Engagement
Immersive Media & Books 2020 defines avid book engagers as respondents who 
“engaged” with 4 or more books per month (in any format: ebook, audiobook, or 
print book). These respondents account for 53% of the survey population. Avid book 
engagers are younger and more ethnically diverse than the general survey population, 

232 Publishing Research Quarterly (2021) 37:227–240
1 3
with greater percentages of Black or African American (16% compared to 13% of 
the general survey population) and Latina/Latino/Latinx (14.4% compared to 12.9% 
of the general survey population) respondents. 67% of Black or African American 
respondents are avid book engagers, and 59% of Latina/Latino/Latinx respondents 
are avid book engagers. In comparison, only 50.1% of European American or white 
respondents are avid book engagers. Because Immersive Media & Books 2020 cap-
tures book engagement behavior beyond typical definitions of reading and buying, it 
is able to reflect “domains of reading experience” [9], p. 697) and “variable litera-
cies” [12], p. 50) that encompass various interactions with books across a range of 
book types/genres. Of respondents buying more books during COVID, again there 
are greater proportions of Black or African American (14% compared to 13% of the 
general survey population) and Latina/Latino/Latinx (16.4% compared to 12.9% of 
the general survey population) respondents than the general survey population.
Across all formats, millennials engage with books more than either of their two 
older cohorts (Gen X and baby boomers). Millennials are also more ethnically 
diverse than other age categories. For example, millennial survey respondents were 
24.4% Black or African American and 25.4% Latina/Latino/Latinx, both double the 
percentages for those racial categories in the general survey population. This trend of 
more ethnically diverse millennials is something that the U.S. population in general 
is experiencing, not just something that is happening in book and media consump-
tion. White Americans are older than other racial groups in America (median age of 
58) and census population projections suggest that over 50% of the U.S. population 
will be non-white by 2045 [14]. Therefore, there is an overlap in these demographics 
of age and race. Young ethnically diverse respondents (especially Black and Latinx 
millennials) are avidly reading, buying, borrowing, and subscribing to books. The 

233
1 3Publishing Research Quarterly (2021) 37:227–240 
book industry has long underestimated Black, Latinx and millennial book engagers 
as desirable target audiences. These are consumers to watch going forward.
The majority of Americans did not change book buying habits during COVID but 
book sales shot up by 8.2%, the largest surge in a decade, according to NPD Book -
Scan, the largest book sales tracking information in the U.S. Most survey respond-
ents reported that their book buying stayed the same during COVID: 62.1% said 
their ebook buying stayed the same during COVID, 67.1% said their audiobook 
buying stayed the same during COVID, and 57% said their print buying stayed the 
same during COVID. This means that the 8.2% sales surge was driven by an avid 
but smaller group of engagers. The report’s data suggest one possibility is that avid 
books engagers (4 + books per month) drove the increase in book sales during 2020.

234 Publishing Research Quarterly (2021) 37:227–240
1 3
Context‑Agnostic Book Discovery
Another major finding of the report is that book discovery is context-agnostic; 
that is, consumers are discovering books in one setting (online vendor, brick-and-
mortar bookstore) and then buying it in another. Context-agnostic discovery is 
especially true for millennials.
For the general survey population, the following discovery contexts led to 
other places of book buying: 35.9% of respondents bought a book online that they 
first found in a library. 31.1% of respondents bought a book in a bookstore that 
they first found in a library. 44.5% of respondents bought a book in a bookstore 
that they first found online. 43.9% of respondents bought a book online that they 
first found in a bookstore. 44.5% of respondents borrowed a book from the library 
that they first found online.
For millennials, context-agnostic book discovery is even more pronounced. 
60.7% of respondents bought a book at a bookstore that they first found online; 
slightly fewer (59.3%) bought a book online that they found in a bookstore. Dis-
covery at a library led to a purchase online (50.9%) or in a bookstore (47.9%). 
Millennials are more likely to borrow a book in a library that they first found 
online (52.7%, compared to 44.5% in the general survey population). All roads 
lead back to the fact that millennials consume more books across formats than 
other age groups, even among avid book engagers of other generations.

235
1 3Publishing Research Quarterly (2021) 37:227–240 
The top four preferred places that respondents discover books are (1) browsing 
online bookstores (Amazon, Audible, Barnes & Noble, bookshop.org, Libro.fm, 
etc.) 30.7%, (2) browsing brick-and-mortar bookstores 17.4%, (3) in-person author 
events (bookstores, libraries, etc.) 13.3%, and (4) browsing shelves in public librar -
ies 12.7%. These preferences highlight the importance of browsing and in-person 
options to discovery. Comparatively, only 5% of respondents preferred virtual author 
events and only 6.7% discovered books through search engines. It is worth noting, 
that attitudes toward virtual events might have shifted to become more positive since 
the time of data collection (September and November 2020) as people have become 
more acclimated to attending virtual events. This datum captures just one of many 
behaviors that might be permanently changed by COVID-era habits.
Cross‑Media Engagement and Discovery
Books exist within an interconnected media ecosystem. One of the main aims of 
this study and report was to position book engagement beside engagement with 
other longform content in games and TV/movies. Cross-media discovery (discov -
ering books through video games or TV/movies and vice versa) is high amongst 
survey respondents, suggesting that audiences are already accustomed to travers-
ing media to pursue stories and worlds they enjoy; there is likely more opportu-
nity for cross-media collaboration. 60.3% of respondents discover TV/movies or 
games through books and 61.2% discover books or games through TV/movies. 
Cross-media discovery is lowest from games: 33.1% discover books or TV/mov -
ies through games. Cross-media discovery varies across age categories: cross-
media discovery is highest with millennials and lowest with baby boomers. For 
example, 72.4% of millennials discover TV/movies and games through books, 
72.9% of millennials discover books or games through TV/movies, and 48.1% of 
millennials discover books or TV/movies through games.

236 Publishing Research Quarterly (2021) 37:227–240
1 3
Respondents engage across media. Between their average engagement before and 
during COVID, respondents had 3.5% growth in those “very” engaged with books, 
8.5% growth in those “very” engaged in TV/movies, 4.4% growth in those “very” 
engaged in PC and console games, and 5.3% growth in those “very” engaged with 
phone and tablet games. This growth is even higher for avid book engagers, who are 
even more active across media. Between their average engagement before and during 
COVID, avid book engagers had 5.3% growth in those “very” engaged with books, 
8.7% growth in those “very” engaged in TV/movies, 5.3% growth in those “very” 
engaged with PC and console games, and 5.9% growth in those “very” engaged with 
phone and tablet games.
Piracy is a cross-media problem. 11.4% of respondents pirate games, 14.4% of 
respondents pirate books, and 19.3% of respondents pirate TV/movies. Adjacent 
media industries might learn best strategies and practices from each other. The music 
industry was the first entertainment industry in the digital age to experience revenue 
loss due to peer-to-peer trading of mp3s. Musicians have adapted to the reality of 
piracy by putting more of a premium on things that are harder to pirate, such as fan 
merchandise and live concerts. The public’s demand for printed books suggests that 
authors won’t have to shift their revenue streams as extremely as did musicians. But 
publishers will have to make the value proposition of buying a printed book more 
evident to younger people habituated to leasing access to entertainment.
Book Pirates: Multidimensional Identities and Behaviors
Book pirates are not only thieves but also customers, library patrons, fanfiction read-
ers/writers, and more. Compared to the general survey population, a higher percent-
age of book pirates during COVID are buying more ebooks (38.7%), audiobooks 
(27.1%) and print books (33.7%); a higher percentage of book pirates are also bor -
rowing more ebooks (30.1%), audiobooks (31.6%), and print books (28.5%). Pirates 
are slightly more likely than the general population to own library cards (77.2% 
compared to 75.8% of the general survey population). Book pirates are younger; 
greater percentages of them are men and BIPOC people than the general survey 
population. The data show that book pirates are avid readers who will buy books 
when the value proposition is clear to them; for example, pirates are much more 
likely than the general survey population to buy books in multiple formats (41.5%). 
As book pirates are also avid book engagers and readers, they are invested in story -
worlds. This is evident in their engagement with fanfiction. While only 12.2% of the 
general survey population (5.8% of responses to the question) are reading/download-
ing fanfiction, the percentage was much higher for book pirates: 27.4%. Book pirates 
are more than twice as likely than the general population to write and read fanfic-
tion. Their passion for extending storyworlds is an opportunity for those who can get 
to know these consumers. Thus, book pirates have multidimensional identities; they 
are not only pirates but also readers, borrowers, and buyers. This disrupts the usual 
absolute perspective—pirate or not pirate—with a more nuanced understanding and 
spectrum of piracy behavior.

237
1 3Publishing Research Quarterly (2021) 37:227–240 
Libraries as Tools of Discovery
The role of libraries in the media ecosystem has been called into question in the 
last few years, particularly following Macmillan’s ebook embargo to libraries on 
new titles because “free” library borrowing was seen to be cannibalizing sales and 
“decreasing the perceived economic value of the book” [1]. The Macmillan ebook 
embargo was lifted in March 2020 [2] but the debate about libraries has continued.
The most important finding is that library borrowing encourages book sales. 
Immersive Media & Books 2020 finds that libraries, bookstores, and online channels 
mutually reinforce each other, leading to engagement and sales in other channels. 
Approximately 1/3rd of respondents bought a book online that they first found in 
a library (35.9%) and similarly 1/3rd of respondents bought a book in a bookstore 
that they had first found in a library (31.1%), demonstrating that library discovery is 
leading to book purchase in these cases.
In Immersive Media & Books 2020, 75.8% of respondents are library card hold-
ers. Older generations such as baby boomers have higher proportions of library card 
holders (76.4%) than younger generations like millennials (70.5%). The report found 
that library borrowing does not preclude or discourage respondents from buying 
books; on the contrary, a greater percentage of library card holders said they were 
buying more books during COVID than the general survey population, in every 
format.

238 Publishing Research Quarterly (2021) 37:227–240
1 3
When a book is unavailable at the library, our data reveal that the most likely 
thing a patron will do is put themselves on the hold list. After that, the two most 
likely things people do when a book is unavailable from the library in the format 
they want is buy it online (23.2% of respondents) or buy it from a local bookstore 
(18.3% of respondents). Library unavailability leads some respondents to go else-
where and purchase the book rather than wait. More discovery is needed to investi-
gate the “long tail” of author discovery at libraries. Do patrons choose other books 
by an author when the one they want isn’t available? Libraries de-risk sampling 
books outside one’s favorite genre. How often does this lead to discovery of a new 
author or genre? Further study could yield insight about how libraries foster curios-
ity, and the extent to which that curiosity drives book engagement.
Conclusion
By taking a broad definition to book engagement as “buying, borrowing, subscribing 
to, reading or gifting a printed book, an ebook, or audiobook in part or in whole”, 
Immersive Media & Books 2020 captures a wider and more inclusive range of book 
engagement behavior. Additionally, these book engagement behaviors are juxta-
posed with other media engagement behaviors for TV/film and games since media 
exist in a networked ecosystem as experienced by the consumer.
The major findings of the report include highly distributed word-of-mouth dis-
covery, the importance of author brand and genre, avid book engagement of Black 
and Latinx millennials, context-agnostic book discovery, cross-media engagement 
and discovery, book pirates as customers in certain circumstances, and libraries as 
tools of discovery. Book discovery preference is for word-of-mouth recommendation 
methods, but even that is highly distributed and thus depends on a book’s particular 

239
1 3Publishing Research Quarterly (2021) 37:227–240 
audience and niche. Author brand is important to the where, how, and why of book 
discovery as is the book’s genre, which is the #1 most important factor driving book 
purchase. Black and Latinx millennial book engagement exceeds previous industry 
benchmarks and expectations for these groups, which indicates that the industry has 
fallen far short of discovering the reading habits and preferences of this important 
audience. Avid book engagers are avid across media, not just books but also TV/
film and games. The identities and behaviors of book pirates are shown in the report 
to be more nuanced than is often portrayed in industry and academic discussions of 
piracy. Book pirates are also consumers, library patrons, fanfiction readers, and avid 
readers. Context-agnostic book discovery indicates that consumers find a book in 
one place and then buy it in another place, with a networked ecosystem of libraries 
and bookstores working together both online and brick-and-mortar. Relatedly, librar-
ies serve as tools of discovery, where library card holders are more inclined to be 
avid book buyers, and where library patrons are most likely to purchase a book if it 
is unavailable from their local library in the preferred format.
Immersive Media & Books 2020 is the first in an intended annual study to assess 
longitudinal data and consumer behavior about books, TV/film, and games.
References
 1. Albanese, A. After Tor Experiment, Macmillan Expands Embargo on Library E-books. Publishers 
Weekly. Jul 25, 2019. https:// www. publi shers weekly. com/ pw/ by- topic/ indus try- news/ libra ries/ artic 
le/ 80758- after- tor- exper iment- macmi llan- expan ds- embar go- on- libra ry-e- books. html
 2. Albanese, A. Macmillan Abandons Library Ebook Embargo. Publishers Weekly. 17 March 2020. 
https:// www. publi shers weekly. com/ pw/ by- topic/ indus try- news/ libra ries/ artic le/ 82715- macmi llan- 
aband ons- libra ry-e- book- embar go. html
 3. Frey, W. Now More Than Half of Americans Are Millennials or Younger. The Brookings Institu-
tion. July 30, 2020. https:// www. brook ings. edu/ blog/ theav enue/ 2020/ 07/ 30/ now- more- than- half- of- 
ameri cans- are- mille nnials- or- young er/
 4. Dimock, M. Defining Generations: Where Millennials end and Generation Z begins. 17 Janu-
ary 2019. https:// www. pewre search. org/ fact- tank/ 2019/ 01/ 17/ where mille nnials- end- and- gener 
ation-z- begins/
 5. Galesic M, Michael B. Effects of questionnaire length on participation and indicators of response 
quality in a web survey. Public Opin Q. 2009;73(2):349–60.
 6. Guren, C, Thad M, and Steven S. COVID-19 and Book Publishing: Impacts and Insights for 2021. 
Publishing Research Quarterly (2021): 1–14.
 7. Maher, J. Covid-19 Impact Listing: Cancellations, Closings, Policy Changes, and More. Publishers 
Weekly. https:// www. publi shers weekly. com/ pw/ by- topic/ indus tryne ws/ trade- shows- events/ artic le/ 
82672- covid- 19- ongoi ng- list- of- cance llati ons. html.
 8. Milliot, J. A Surprisingly Strong Year of Book Sales Continues. Publishers Weekly. Oct 9, 2020. 
https:// www. publi shers weekly. com/ pw/ by- topic/ indus tryne ws/ books elling/ artic le/ 84593-a- surpr 
ising ly- strong- year- of- book- sales- conti nues. html.
 9. Nishikawa K. Merely Reading. PMLA. 2015;130(3):697–703.
 10. Perrin, A. Who Doesn’t Read Books in America? Pew Research Center. Sep 26, 2019. https:// www. 
pewre search. org/ fact- tank/ 2019/ 09/ 26/ who- doesnt- read- books- iname rica/
 11. Price, G. U.S. Print Book Sales Rose 8.2 Percent in 2020 According to Data From NPD. 7 January 
2021. https:// www. infod ocket. com/ 2021/ 01/ 07/u- s- print- book- sales- rose-8- 2- perce nt- in- 2020- accor 
ding- to- data- from- npd/
 12. Radway, J. Interpretive communities and variable literacies: The functions of romance reading. Dae-
dalus (1984): 49–73.

240 Publishing Research Quarterly (2021) 37:227–240
1 3
 13. Rea, A. Reading Through the Ages: Generational Reading Study. Library Journal. Jan 6, 2020. 
https:// www. libra ryjou rnal. com/? detai lStory= Readi ng- Throu gh- the- Ages- Gener ation al- Readi 
ng- Survey.
 14. Schaeffer, K. The Most common age among whites in the U.S. is 58 – more than double that of 
racial and ethnic minorities, July 30, 2019, https:// www. pewre search. org/ fact- tank/ 2019/ 07/ 30/ 
most- common- age- among- usrac ial- ethnic- groups/.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published 
maps and institutional affiliations.
