Waddle: using virtual penguin embodiment as a vehicle for empathy and informal learning

Kevin Ponto
kevin.ponto@wisc.edu University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, Wisconsin, USA
Kaldan Kopp
kdkopp2@wisc.edu University of Wisconsin-Madison
USA

Ross Tredinnick
rdtredinnick@wisc.edu University of Wisconsin-Madison
USA
Luke Swanson
swansonl@cs.wisc.edu University of Wisconsin-Madison
USA

Monae Verbeke
monae.verbeke@freechoicelearning.org Institute for Learning Innovation USA
David Gagnon
djgagnon@wisc.edu University of Wisconsin-Madison
USA

Figure 1: Shows various aspects of the virtual penguin experience. From left to right, the user sees themselves as a penguin in a mirror, picks up rocks with their beak to build a nest, does a matting dance and defends the nest from a Skua attack.

ABSTRACT
This paper presents, Waddle, a virtual experience to promote informal learning by embodying the user as an Adélie Penguin to partake in a narrative-based virtual reality application that shares the story of the lives of these unique animals. We test the effects of this experience on informal learning and empathy, an important component for fostering social engagement with ecology. The research demonstrates that the developed experience is able to support informal learning, virtual embodiment, and is able to create a positive change in empathy.
KEYWORDS
Virtual Embodiment, Empathy, Informal Learning
ACM Reference Format: Kevin Ponto, Ross Tredinnick, Monae Verbeke, Kaldan Kopp, Luke Swanson, and David Gagnon. 2023. Waddle: using virtual penguin embodiment as a vehicle for empathy and informal learning. In 29th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology (VRST 2023), October 09–11, 2023, Christchurch, New Zealand. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2 pages. https://doi. org/10.1145/3611659.3617211

1 INTRODUCTION
Recent research into embodied learning demonstrates significant promise for teaching complex STEM topics [5], as well as increasing empathy and perspective-taking [3]. Previous work has also explored the use of virtual reality (VR) for facilitating embodied learning experiences with animals, but have often failed to do so, citing a lack of visuomotor alignment between the animal and the learner’s experience [7]. In this research project, we leverage this work to design a new VR experience with intentional gesture congruence and visuomotor synchrony, in which the learner takes on the body of an Adélie penguin living in Antarctica. This experience is used as a vehicle to empirically explore how high-level learning, embodiment and empathy are facilitated and related.
Based on the results of Krekhov, et al. we hypothesized that the user would be able to accept themselves as an Adélie Penguin [4]. Based on the results of Ahn, et. al, we hypothesized that virtual embodiment would enhance learning outcomes [1] and that this learning would translate to informal learning environments [9]. Additionally, we hypothesized that virtual embodiment would produce an increased empathy for creature that the participant embodies [6].

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
VRST 2023, October 09–11, 2023, Christchurch, New Zealand
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0328-7/23/10. https://doi.org/10.1145/3611659.3617211

2 METHODS
The VR experience, entitled Waddle, is a 20-minute Virtual Reality experience that demonstrates visuomotor congruence with an Adélie penguin. Hand tracking mode was utilized, which uses outward facing cameras on the Quest 2 to identify and track the user’s

VRST 2023, October 09–11, 2023, Christchurch, New Zealand

Ponto, et al.

Figure 2: Shows the average for participants ability to identify major life events and challenges for Adélie penguins pre and post their virtual experience.
hand positions without using additional hand controllers. The experience was developed in consultation with a team of educational game designers, VR researchers, and research scientists.
The experience begins with a series of interactions that are designed to orientate the user to the system. Upon putting on the headset, the user sees a snowy scene. Their perspective is approximately 0.5 meters above the snowy floor and they see a beak extending forward where their nose should be. Looking down, they see their white belly and flippers instead of arms. To one side is an icy stone obstacle that acts as a mirror, showing a reflection of the Adélie penguin avatar they inhabit and control. Over the course of the virtual experience the user experiences major aspects of a penguin’s life including building a nest, finding a mate and defending and egg from attack (Figure 1).
The study collected data from forty-three grade 3 through 8 (age 8 through 13) students, in groups of 10-20 from different informal learning organizations, attending a science festival on a major university campus. Empathy was measured using the Dispositional Empathy with Nature scale [8], consisting of nine Likert-scale questions. Embodiment was measured using a variation of the Avatar Embodiment Questionnaire [2], consisting of 23 Likert-scale questions. Informal learning was gathered using two opened ended question related to describing life events for an Adélie penguin and the challenges that these creatures face during their lifetime. Empathy and Embodiment scores were gathered by averaging scores across the questions, scaled from -4 to 4. Pre and Post test conditions were tested using a paired t-test and regressions were performed using Pearson’s product-moment correlation.
3 RESULTS
The virtual experience did show gains in learning as shown in Figure 2. The data also provided support to creating embodiment. From the range of -4 to 4, the mean overall embodiment score was 0.9860627 with a standard deviation of 0.965754. A significant change was between the empathy ratings pre-experience (M = 0.85 , SD = 1.20) and the ratings post-experience (M = 1.65 , SD = 1.36) t(40) = -2.95, p = 0.005. A significant correlation was also found between the embodiment and the post-experience empathy ratings, r(39) = 0.53, p<.001 (Figure 3).
4 CONCLUSION
This research indicate that direct embodiment of a penguin may be possible in VR, as shown by an overall positive score for this

Figure 3: (Left) Shows the significant change in empathy pre
and post experience. (Right) Shows the significant correlation
between empathy and embodiment.
construct. Additionally, this research demonstrates that the developed virtual experience is able to provide a significant change in empathy and a positive impact on informal learning. As the work demonstrates a significant correlation between embodiment and empathy, virtual embodiment of non-human characters may provide a powerful tool for both education and appreciation of other creatures. Future work will aim to better understand what aspects of this experience provide support for embodiment and empathy and how these constructs relate to and support informal learning.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 2116046 and 2052905.
REFERENCES
[1] Sun Joo Ahn, Joshua Bostick, Elise Ogle, Kristine L Nowak, Kara T McGillicuddy, and Jeremy N Bailenson. 2016. Experiencing nature: Embodying animals in immersive virtual environments increases inclusion of nature in self and involvement with nature. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21, 6 (2016), 399–419.
[2] Mar Gonzalez-Franco and Tabitha C Peck. 2018. Avatar embodiment. towards a standardized questionnaire. Frontiers in Robotics and AI 5 (2018), 74.
[3] Tessaly Jen, Sarah Lee, Lana Cosic, Rachel Askew, Bethany Daniel, and Noel Enyedy. 2021. Friends as Flowers: How Perspective-Taking and Empathy Transform Children’s Relationships to Science and Nature. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference of the Learning Sciences-ICLS 2021. International Society of the Learning Sciences.
[4] Andrey Krekhov, Sebastian Cmentowski, and Jens Krüger. 2019. The illusion of animal body ownership and its potential for virtual reality games. In 2019 IEEE Conference on Games (CoG). IEEE, 1–8.
[5] Mitchell J Nathan. 2021. Foundations of embodied learning: A paradigm for education. Routledge.
[6] Daniel Pimentel and Sriram Kalyanaraman. 2021. How Multi-Sensory Animal Embodiment in Virtual Reality Influences Environmental Threat Processing and Conservation Behaviors. (2021).
[7] Alexandra Sierra Rativa, PGA Bakker, and AG Sierra Rativa. 2022. Animal embodiment: embodying a beaver in immersive virtual environments to create empathy and teach about the impact of global warming in a playful way.. In Virtual Reality International Conference ConVRgence 2022-VRIC.
[8] Kim-Pong Tam. 2013. Dispositional empathy with nature. Journal of environmental psychology 35 (2013), 92–104.
[9] Ross Tredinnick, Rebecca Cors, James Madsen, David Gagnon, Silvia Bravo-Gallart, Bryce Sprecher, and Kevin Ponto. 2020. Exploring the Universe from AntarcticaAn Informal STEM Polar Research Exhibit. Journal of STEM Outreach 3, 1 (2020), 1–13.

