2022 Spooky Spectacular Showcase
This list is a crowd-sourced document of favorite media recommended by members of the FMRT (Films & Media Round Table)
GameRT (Games & Gaming Round Table) and the GNCRT (Graphic Novels & Comics Round Table)
of the ALA (American Library Association).
You can find information about joining the round tables on their websites and apply for membership here.
All programming will be broadcast via Twitch. Tune in here: https://www.twitch.tv/alagamert
Recording collection for this event on Twitch: https://www.twitch.tv/collections/lk_hCoZDIBdLrA
#ALAspooky22
TABLE OF CONTENTS ● GameRT Twitch Policy ● Schedule of Events ● Additional Media Recommendations ○ Books ○ Comics ○ Film ○ Games ○ Podcasts ○ Other Content ● Future Events ● The Round Tables Want You!
GameRT Twitch Policy
1. Be kind and respectful to one another. 2. Hate speech of any type will not be tolerated. 3. We reserve the right to remove anyone from the chat for any reason. 4. If you are feeling harassed by anyone, please notify a GameRT twitch mod and
one of us will assist you. 5. If you'd rather talk privately about anything, please send us a direct message.

Schedule of events for Friday, October 21, 2022

12:30 - 1:30 CST

Round Table Discussion

Titles discussed FMRT Elliott
● Scary A24 films like Midsommer, Hereditary, Krisha, It Comes at Night, Men, Lamb, Under the Skin, The Lighthouse, The VVitch
Athina ● X-Files and Are You Afraid of the Dark ● Wytches comic run, from Zach Synder ● Zombies, Run! exercise app

GameRT Danielle
● Trivia Murder Party 2 ● Mysterium ● Mysterium Park ● Scary Stories to Tell in the Dark

Rebecca ● Arkham Horror: The Card Game (card game) ● Cozy Grove (video game) ● Cthulhu Wars (miniatures board game) ● Dead of Winter: A Crossroads Game (board game) ● Dwelling (TTRPG) ● Horrified (board game) ● Left 4 Dead (video game) ● Mansions of Madness 2E (hybrid board game w/ digital app) ● MonsDRAWsity (card game) ● Mysterium (board game) ● Nemesis (miniatures board game) ● Numbskulls (TTRPG) ● Nyctophobia: Vampire Encounter (board game)

GNCRT Liz
● Sleepover Sleuths by Mercedes Campos López (@merfishcomics) ● The Accursed Vampire by Madeline McGrane (@madmcgrane) ● M is for Monster by Talia Dutton (@Agent_Talia)

2:30 - 3:30 CST

Dramatic Comics Reading

"You can only see as far as your oil lamp"
Hollow Writers: Shannon Watters & Branden Boyer-White Artist: Berenice Nelle Colorists: Kaitlyn Musto, Kieran Quigley & Gonçalo Lopes

Publisher: Boom!Studios https://www.boom-studios.com/series/hollow/

5:00 - 6:00 CST

Don’t Starve Live Play

https://store.steampowered.com/app/322330/Dont_Starve_Together/

6:00 - 7:00 CST

Monsdrawsity Live Play

https://www.deepwatergaming.com/products/monsdrawsity

7:30 - 9:30 CST

Nosferatu Live Stream

Nosferatu Director F W Murnau 1922 https://archive.org/details/Nosferatu1922/Nosferatu-smaller2.m4v

Additional Media Recommendations
Books
The Haunting of Hill House by Shirley Jackson The Halloween Tree by Ray Bradbury Horrorstör by Grady Hendrix Dark Archives: A Librarian’s Investigation Into the Science and History of Books Bound in Human Skin by Megan Rosenbloom Doll Bones by Holly Black The Nutshell Studies of Unexplained Death by Corinne May Botz The Silver Kiss by Annette Curtis Klause Carpe Jugulum by Terry Pratchett The Abhorsen series by Garth Nix The Year of the Beasts by Cecil Castellucci and Nate Powell Smoke Gets in Your Eyes and Other Lessons from the Crematory by Caitlin Doughty Lincoln in the Bardo by George Saunders The Dr. Greta Helsing series by Vivian Shaw The Locked Tomb series by Tamsyn Muir The Scholomance series by Naomi Novik Things in Jars by Jess Kidd Other Terrors: an inclusive anthology edited by Vince A. Liaguno and Rena Mason Murder Maps USA: crime scenes revistited by Adam Selzer Nothing But Blackened Teeth by Cassandra Khaw Trick or Treat: a History of Halloween by Lisa Morton Middlegame by Seanan McGuire What Lives in the Woods by Lindsay Currie

What Moves the Dead by T. Kingfisher The Innsmouth Legacy by Ruthanna Emrys Ring Shout by P. Djèlí Clark Newsflesh Series by Mira Grant Rolling in the Deep by Mira Grant Lovecraft by Matt Ruff

Comics
anything by Junji Ito Apocalypse Taco by Nathan Hale Black Hole by Charles Burns Beautiful Darkness by Fabien Vehlmann and Kerascoët Baba Yaga’s Assistant by Marika McCoola Box of Lights by Seiko Erisawa The Creepy Case Files of Margo Maloo by Drew Weing Deep Dark Fears by Fran Krause Devil’s Candy by Rem My Favorite Thing is Monsters by Emil Ferris Garlic and the Vampire by Bree Paulsen The Girl from the Other Side by Nagabe Hollow by Shannon Watters, Branden Boyer-White, and Berenice Nelle Kitaro by Shigeru Mizuki Kurosagi Corpse Delivery Service by Eiji Otsuka Laid Waste by Julia Gfrörer Monstress by Marjorie M Liu and Sana Takeda Pet Shop of Horrors by Matsuri Akino Pretty Deadly by Kelly Sue DeConnick and Emma Rios Sacred Heart by Liz Suburbia Through the Woods by E M Carroll The Walking Cat: A Cat’s-Eye-View of the Zombie Apocalypse by Tomo Kitaoka
Films
(available on Kanopy): The Babadook (dir. Jennifer Kent, 2014) The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (dir. Robert Wiene, 1919) Let the Right One In (dir. Tomas Alfredson, 2008) Midsommar (dir. Ari Aster, 2019)

The Orphanage (dir. Juan Antonio Bayona, 2007)
Games
You can find game recommendations posted every month on the GameRT blog. Check out the newest post on spooky games!
Board Games
Arkham Horror , Designer: Nikki Valens, Richard Launius, Kevin Wilson Betrayal at House on the Hill, Designer: Bruce Glassco, Rob Daviau, Bill McQuillan, Mike Selinker, Teeuwynn Woodruff Betrayal Legacy, Designer: Campy Creatures, Designer: Mattox Shuler Dead of Winter, Designer: Jonathan Gilmour, Isaac Vega Disney Villainous, Designer: Prospero Hall Eldritch Horror, Designer: Corey Konieczka, Nikki Valens The Fury of Dracula, Designer: Gloom, Designer: Haunted Mansion, Designer: Prospero Hall Horrified, Designer: Prospero Hall House of Danger, Designer: Last Night on Earth, Designer: MonDRAWsity, Designer: Eric Slauson Mysterium, Designer: Oleksandr Nevskiy, Oleg Sidorenko Mysterium Park, Designer: Oleksandr Nevskiy, Oleg Sidorenko Nyctophobia, Designer: Catherine Stippell One Night Werewolf, Designer: Ted Alspach, Akihisa Okui Unfathomable, Designer: Tony Fanchi, Corey Konieczka Unmatched Cobble and Fog, Designer: Rob Daviau, Justin D. Jacobson, Chris Leder, Kevin Rodgers

Werewords, Designer: Ted Alspach Zombicide, Designer: Raphaël Guiton, Jean-Baptiste Lullien, Nicolas Raoult Zombie Dice, Designer: Steve Jackson
TTRPGs
Babes in the Woods by Adam Vass (World Champ Game Co.) Blades in the Dark by John Harper The Great American Witch by Christopher Grey (Gallant Knight Games) A Guide to Casting Phantoms in the Revolution by Adam Vass & Will Jobst (World Champ Game Co.) Hieronymous by Laurie O’Connel Jiangshi: Blood in the Banquet Hall by Banana Chan and Sen-Foong Lim Low Stakes by Craig Campbell (NerdBurger Games) Monster of the Week by Michael Sands The Skeletons by Jason Morningstar (Bully Pulpit Games) Snack Time by McKay Anderson (Backfire Game Studio) Spell the RPG by Taylor Smith (Whimsy Machines Games) Survival of the Able by Jacob Woods (Accessible Games) Thousand Year Old Vampire by Tim Hutchings (Petit Guignol) Witch + Craft ed. Shannon Campbell, Sickest Witch by Justin Sirois (Severed Books)
TTRPG Safety Tools
● Script Change by Beau Jágr Sheldon ● The Door is Open by Eirik Fatland
○ Blog by Lizzie Stark ○ Blog 2 by Eirik Fatland ● TTRPG Safety Toolkit collected by Kienna Shaw and Lauren Bryant-Monk ○ TTRPG Safety Toolkit Guide ○ Google Drive
Podcasts
Alice Isn’t Dead by Joseph Fink

Gal Pals Present: OverKill by Lia Hagen
Old Gods of Appalachia by Steve Shell and Cam Collins
Welcome to Nightvale by Joseph Fink and Jeffrey Cranor
Other Content
The Mütter Museum is running a Year of Dracula event to celebrate 125 years since the book’s original publication with a mix of virtual and in person programming: https://muttermuseum.org/year-dracula
In 2018, the Smithsonian American Art Museum restored and exhibited The Nutshell Studies of Unexplained Death- dollhouse-sized dioramas of crimes designed to train detectives on examining crime scenes. The exhibit is archived in images and VR format on the Smithsonian’s website: https://americanart.si.edu/exhibitions/nutshells
“Spanish ‘Dracula’ finds new blood, more than 90 years after its release”, Mandalit del Barco, All Things Considered, NPR, September 19, 2022 https://www.npr.org/2022/09/19/1122120454/spanish-dracula-finds-new-blood-more-than-90-yea rs-after-its-release
Lovecraft Reread “Welcome to the H. P. Lovecraft reread, in which two modern Mythos writers—Ruthanna Emrys and Anne M Pillsworth—get girl cooties all over old Howard’s original stories. Together they hope to explore both the awesome and the problematic, both the deliberately and accidentally horrific. Reading order will be more or less random. As the Great Race of Yith would point out, if they cared enough to do so, linear time is merely an illusion anyway.” https://www.tor.com/series/the-lovecraft-reread/
The Legend of Sleepy Hollow Adapted by FilmJoy “The Legend of Sleepy Hollow is a humorous, animated adaptation of the classic story by Washington Irving, as written and directed by Mikey Neumann.” https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLdGl5mi0XeW0dEXaL-izT2Hnv3cAwEnFo
Horror Section FictionPodcasts.com “FictionPodcasts.com is a site where you can discover new and interesting fiction podcasts. We'll continue to add new fiction podcasts regularly.” https://fictionpodcasts.com/category/horror
Monstrum from PBS Digital Studios Join Emily Zarka, Ph.D. on a journey to discover humans’ unique drive to create and shape monster mythology through oral storytelling, literature and film. https://www.pbs.org/show/monstrum/
Itch.io TTRPG Halloween Spooktacular 2022

FMRT

Future RT Events:

GameRT
Information on upcoming events and webinar recordings available on the GameRT website.
International Games Month November 1, 2022 12:00 PM Central Time https://games.ala.org/international-games-month/ International Games Month is an initiative run by volunteers from library organizations around the world to reconnect communities through their libraries around the educational, recreational, and social value of all types of games.
Low Stress High Mayhem - Halo ‘n’ Horns November 11, 2022 12:00 PM Central Time https://bit.ly/TwitchGameRT Low Stress High Mayhem is a TTRPG live play session streamed on Twitch. GameRT members will explain and play the game then talk about how it can be added to library programing. Join us as our hosts delve into the micro RPG Halo 'n' Horns by Connie Chang. “ Halo 'n' Horns is a comedy micro RPG for two GMs — an angel and a devil — and one player: the mortal they're trying to win over.”
Round Table Round Table - Games & Grants November 16, 2022 12:00 PM Central Time https://bit.ly/TwitchGameRT The Round Table Round Table is our newest Twitch program where we bring together several librarians and get a chance to chat about games, libraries, games in libraries, and all the ways we can bring play into our spaces. This session will focus on how grants can be used to bring in games and gaming into the library.
GNCRT
GNCRT is a collaborative organization dedicated to supporting library workers in all aspects of engaging with graphic novels and comics, including collection development, programming, and advocacy. GNCRT offers support to all types of libraries, of all sizes and scopes, serving all types of users.
Stay in touch with GNCRT @libcomix on Twitter, Instagram, and ALAGNCRT on Facebook.
GNCRT Writers Support Group Friday, November 4th, 2022, 1:00 - 1:30 CST Join us for a brainstorming session of the newly founded GNCRT's writers' support group! Share your thoughts and ideas for how this group can help you with your writing goals and learn about different publishing venues for comics librarian scholarship. Register to attend here.

Talking up a storm: using interactive prompts to promote cultural practices in family reading of visual narratives Using visual narratives to support cultural practices in reading can be an important way to affirm the contribution of families’ cultural identities to children's literacy. This session will present interactive prompts for engaging families with graphic novels, as well as examples of a variety of conversational tools used for family reading of wordless picture books, comics and graphic novels. Time and date TBA- follow @libcomix for updates!
Libcomix Online is currently accepting program proposals for content that is diverse, innovative, and informative. Interested individuals should complete this submission form. After review, the committee will contact applicant with next steps. You can browse past sessions to view previous examples.

The Round Tables Want You!
Nominations are open for Round Table Board positions. If you would like to run, apply here through December 15, 2022.

Self-nominations are welcomed and encouraged. Please note that all nominees must be ALA and Round Table members in good standing before their name will appear on the ballot.

FMRT is recruiting: ● Chair Elect ● Treasurer

GameRT is recruiting: ● President Elect ● ALA Councilor ● 2 Members at Large

GNCRT is recruiting:

● President Elect- a three-year commitment that proceeds from President-Elect (2023-24)

to President (2024-25) to Past-President (2025-26). This role is best suited for those with

a desire to lead, who have a strong vision for the round table, and are comfortable being

a forward-facing, clear communicator.

● Secretary- a two-year commitment that is best suited for those with strong attention to

detail and a knack for organizational and logistical tasks.

● 2 Members at Large- a two-year commitment that is best suited for enthusiastic

members who want to remain more engaged in the programming activities of the round

table while serving on the board and are comfortable bringing member concerns

🎃🕯️🎃 🎃🕯️🎃 forward as they emerge.

Stay spooky!

