Utopia on the Tabletop
Edited by Jo Lindsay Walton

Brighton, UK: Ping Press, 2024. ISBN: 978-1-912802-92-0 All text CC BY-NC-ND 4.0, except Roots & Flowers, which is released under the Anti-Capitalist Attribution Cooperative License. Front cover art and internal artworks © Alice Duke, all rights reserved.
ii

Acknowledgments
Thank you to Conjured Games and especially Brennan Nova and Philipp Doebler; to the Sussex Digital Humanities Lab and especially Sam Ladkin, Alice Eldridge, Sharon Webb, Ben Roberts, Kate Malone, Elena Dennison, and Alex Peverett; to ASU Center for Science and the Imagination and especially Joey Eschrich; to Eric Stein, Alice Duke, Robbie Dawson, Dilman Dila, Maurice Ssebisubi, Jana Kleineberg, Anahi Molina, Perpetua Kirby, Rebecca Webb, David Blandy, Chris Sandom, Daniel Locke, Laurie Penny, Francis Gene-Rowe, Stephen Mooney, Victoria Walden, Tanya Kant, Chris Doyle, Madhu Krishnan, Caroline Edwards, Jacob BardRosenberg, Erin Horáková, Elizabeth Stainforth, Gwydion Benyon, and Samantha Walton. Several chapters in this collection first appeared online in Vector, the critical journal of the British Science Fiction Association. Special thanks to Polina Levontin.
iii

Figures and Illustrations

Citadel of Chaos (Blue Mountain Arcturus)

238

Successful Proposition For The Great North Exhibition (Tatham & O’Sullivan) 240

Black Swan Genesis Sketch (Rafferty & Bowden)

272-273

'Temporary Utopias' photograph (Sofia Nordin)

283

Layout of the River Basin Game (Lankford et al.)

293

Layout of the irrigation scale model in northern Senegal (Scheer)

295

The Irrigation Management Game canvas (Ertsen)

297

“Fields” and “Water” in the Irrigation Management Game (Ertsen)

298

Table game impressions of the Irrigation Management Game (Ertsen)

299

Illustration (Duke)

307

iv

Contents

1. Jo Lindsay Walton, Introduction

1

Essays

2. Tyler Brunette, The Rules of Utopia: The Procedural Rhetoric of

22

The Book of Cairn

3. Nicholas L. Stefanski, Post-it Utopia: The Promises and Pitfalls of

34

Arium’s Lean Worldbuilding

4. Asu İnci Sert, The Perfect (Anti) Utopia of the Alpha Complex: A Look

57

into Paranoia RPG and Satire of the Utopia

5. Grace A.T. Worm, We Will Never Escape Utopia: Gender, Queer,

66

Pragmatic, and Hopeful Utopia in The Treasure at the End of the

Dungeon is an Escape From This Dungeon and We Will Never Escape

From This Dungeon

6. Ben Platt, Finding Utopia in the Failures and Lost Languages of

90

Dialect

7. Vivek Santayana, Behind Masks: Superheroes and a Neurodiverse

107

Utopia

8. Emma French, Dimension 20’s The Unsleeping City: Fantasy and Play

131

as Means of Claiming Agency in Modern Dystopias

9. Kelsey Paige Mason, Are Games and Utopia ‘Just Make-Believe?’ A

150

Study of Commodified Neutrality and Granular Diversity in D&D

10. Jess Wind, ‘Putting Racism Aside’: Dungeons & Dragons, Ancestry &

210

Culture, and Race Discourse in the Homebrew Community

11. Mark Rohtmaa-Jackson and Allan Hughes, Citadel of Chaos:

235

An art practice to materialise an alternate present

12. Simon O’Sullivan, On Tabletop Role-Playing Games and Fictioning

250

13. Ruth Catlow, To Larp a DAO

262

14. Tova Gerge, Temporary Utopias

276

15. Maurits W. Ertsen, Telling the Acrobats which way to Jump: Irrigation

289

Gaming and Utopian Thinking

v

Dialogues
Utopian Drama: Siân Adiseshiah interview .......................................................... 308 Bittersweet Utopias: Kellynn Wee interview.......................................................... 325 Beat the Boss: Roleplaying and Labor Organizing: Doug Geisler interview ........... 345 We Can Play More than Fantasy Cops: Gabriel Caetano Barbosa interview .......... 368
Games
Paul Czege, How to Ooze Charm in the Future..................................................... 384 Gabriel Caetano Barbosa, Roots & Flowers .......................................................... 394
Afterword and Notes on Contributors
Afterword: In Defence of Blueprints ..................................................................... 410 Contributors........................................................................................................ 502
vi

1. Introduction
Jo Lindsay Walton
Utopia on the Tabletop unites the venerable field of Utopian Studies with the relatively new field of Tabletop Roleplaying Game Studies (TTRPG Studies). The main chapters fall loosely into three sections. In the first section are six chapters each focusing on a specific tabletop roleplaying game, tracing utopian (and other -topian) energies. The irrepressible Dungeons & Dragons snorts and stamps in the middle section, with three chapters exploring official Wizards of the Coast publications, a significant homebrew supplement, and an actual play podcast. Then come five mostly shorter chapters with greater emphasis on practitioner reflection. Dialogues follow: Siân Adiseshiah on utopian drama, Doug Geisler on roleplaying union organising, Kellynn Wee on speculative anthropology, and Gabriel Caetano Barbosa on game design, facilitation, decolonisation, and more. There are also a pair of small, fully playable roleplaying games, by Paul Czege and Gabriel Caetano Barbosa.1 How to Ooze Charm in the Future is oriented to solo play, and Roots & Flowers for a group. Finally there is an afterword by me, suggesting some broad links between TTRPGs and utopia studies, and proposing a kind of defence of the blueprint utopia.
Writing in the middle of the 2020s, tabletop roleplaying games seem to be going from strength to strength, with the hobby as a whole gaining increasing recognition, and a fiercely flourishing indie design scene. ‘The special thing about games, and tabletop games in particular, is the way they actively train you to think from within their rules,’ writes Eric D. Thurm.2 In this way, tabletop games might offer a sort of ritual veneration of values: including the values of countercultures, of alternatives to the
1 These include everything you need to play them (except maybe some dice), but have shed some visuals and vibes. Please do go and check out the original versions, and other work by their creators. 2 Eric D. Thurm, Avidly Reads Board Games (New York: New York University Press, 2019), p. 29.
1

Utopia on the Tabletop
mainstream. The platform Itch.io, for example, is filled with work by independent creators, some of it explicitly anti-capitalist, some of it avantgarde in sensibility, and much of it sustaining and transforming the traditions of anarchist and queer zine subculture. Of course, any anti-capitalist game produced under capitalism is likely to harbour some tensions. But there is at least an atmosphere of protean and pervasive hopefulness in these indie game design scenes.
Utopia, on the other hand, is a bit more of a mixed picture. As a category of cultural production utopia has a long illustrious history, and probably a bright enough future. In other words, for people wearing their critic hats and their scholar hats (and perhaps their author hats and artist hats, and maybe GM hats and player hats too), utopia remains an enduring and justifiable fascination. But what about applied utopianism? Is the concept “utopia” really much use when it comes to fighting injustice and improving people’s lives?
Maybe, maybe not. The word is definitely off-putting in many contexts and for many audiences. Utopia carries a lot of baggage. It may require a lot of explanation. Sometimes the term may mesmerise you into feeling you are doing things that are more revolutionary than they really are. You may also have to juggle different and contradictory definitions of utopia, sometimes defending utopia, sometimes using utopia as a pejorative term:
Are we being utopian? It is utopian to expect more from a system than it can possibly deliver. To expect equality and justice—or even rationality—from capitalism is utopian. To expect social solidarity from markets, or self-management from central planning, is equally utopian. To argue that competition can yield empathy or that authoritarianism can promote initiative or that keeping most people from decision making can employ human potential most fully: these are utopian fantasies without question.3
3 Michael Albert and Robin Hahnel, ‘Participatory Planning’ in Socialist Visions (Boston: South End Press, 1983), p. 273.
2

Introduction
As Ruth Levitas outlines, the emotional associations of utopia are often indifferent or negative:
Colloquial usage reiterates [Thomas] More’s pun: the good place is no place; utopia is a nice idea but totally unrealistic. Sometimes the positive connotations are missing altogether and utopian becomes synonymous with unrealistic. Sometimes utopia is viewed even more negatively and equated with totalitarianism.4
So why utopia? Why utopia, still? Many frameworks for radically better futures are available. It has been suggested that utopia is really a verb disguised as a noun, which sounds quite exciting. But similar things can be said of alternatives to utopianism. For example, many abolitionist movements combine radical visions of the future with concrete actions in the present, and are at peace with not having all the answers yet. Such movements are about building truly new ways of doing things, though they often take their names from the old things they oppose: police abolition, prison abolition, money abolition, school abolition, family abolition. Maybe we might add anti-work and post-work, degrowth and postgrowth, antiglobalisation and alter-globalisation, and postcapitalism. Utopianism may have something in common with such movements. But does that common ground signal the continued relevance of utopianism? Or does it signal its obsolescence? Is it time for utopians to hang up at least some of their hats?
Postcapitalism, Precapitalism, Capitalist Realism
Among the movements described above, there is a labryinthine set of connections. Let’s peer into this labyrinth at the entrance marked ‘Postcapitalism.’ Until the 1990s, the postcapitalism term tended to be associated with Soviet communism, even though it never really described the USSR very well, Russia having been semi-capitalist when the
4 Ruth Levitas, The Concept of Utopia (Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 1991), p. 179.
3

Utopia on the Tabletop
Bolsheviks took power in 1917. But since the dissolution of the USSR, the word’s meaning has shifted and spread. Postcapitalism has grown intriguingly vague and polysemous, embodying profoundly diverse values and visions. Perhaps postcapitalism is less a fixed end-state than it is an agile and fabulous macguffin, an enabler of magic searches, chases, heists, and quests. In this sense, postcapitalism might be read as rebranding or rebooting utopianism, in a bid to shake utopia’s living impulse free from its tainted terminology.
Some significant strands of postcapitalist thought could include (take a breath): degrowth and postgrowth; diverse economies and the prefigurative politics of more-than-capitalist practice; participatory economics and radical democracy; post-scarcity and post-work; land defence and anti-extractivism; Marxism; as well as some transhumanist and/or techno-libertarian hot takes the transcendence of capitalism, very much shaped by the California Ideology (‘tech bros,’ to use a colloquial term). These visions are not all mutually exclusive, although some of them are. Besides these, there are also plenty of scrappy, messy projects and experiments which don’t really have clear labels, but could be considered part of contemporary postcapitalist thought.
This interest in postcapitalism is resurgent not only in political theory and practice, but also in culture such as books, movies and games, including TTRPGs. The feminist geographer duo writing under the combined name J.K. Gibson-Graham suggest that postcapitalism is not only imaginable, but already exists. Postcapitalism is constantly being imagined and enacted all around us—if we can just learn to notice, interpret, and cultivate it. TTRPGs may be one way of doing this. They are not necessarily the best way to do so, though. We should be alert to the distractions and mystifications that TTRPGs offer, as much as to their potentials.
Speculative fiction such as science fiction, fantasy, horror tends to dominate TTRPG publishing across both the mainstream and indie scenes. Science fiction in particular is oriented to possible futures, including postcapitalist ones. These fictive postcapitalist worlds vary extensively, from blasted wastelands riven by Hobbesian bellum omnium contra omnes, the war of all against all; to devout anarcho-syndicalists sitting in circles
4

Introduction
and making an economy just by talking about it; to high-tech fully automated luxury communist arcologies-in-space, replete with tractor beams and matter replicators.
Science fiction in general seems to have grown newly interested in postcapitalism, since the 2008 financial crisis shook some authors out of their complacency regarding economic reality (while perhaps confirming others in theirs). Genres and movements such as solarpunk, climate fiction, transhumanist science fiction, and Afrofuturism, Africanfuturism, Indigenous futurism, and other -futurisms, are especially thirsty for postcapitalist ideas and images. A recent article by Yannick Rumpala surveying postcapitalist science fiction mentions Roddenbery’s Star Trek and Banks’s Culture in relation to automation and post-scarcity, Le Guin’s The Dispossessed and Callenbach’s Ecotopia in relation to degrowth, several novels by Kim Stanley Robinson in relation to the commons, and Daniel Suarez’s Daemon and Freedom and Cory Doctorow’s Walkaway in relation to techno-anarchism.5
Of course, not all speculative fiction (in fact, not even all science fiction) is set in the future. TTRPGs also allows us to visit pre-capitalist worlds, or worlds which thrive now in the margins and cracks of capitalism, or in exotic dimensions or fairylands disconnected from human history altogether. Even when such worlds are not intradiegetically postcapitalist—canonically, none of the characters’ ancestors lived under capitalism—we might still interpret them as postcapitalist. That is, these worlds may reflect our own capitalist imagination reaching for something strange beyond itself, seeking glimpses of what alternatives may glitter in the aftermath of all that is familiar.
Then again, what can be really strange about such worlds is that so much about them is not strange at all. Dungeons & Dragons may invoke the Middle Ages, but it actually contains quite a lot of capitalism too. For example, in Jacques Le Goff’s words, ‘The realities of what we today call
5 Yannick Rumpala, ‘Fictional varieties of postcapitalism and imaginaries of systemic transformation: mapping alternatives in science fiction and making use of their heuristic potential,’ Culture and Organization (2024), doi:10.1080/14759551.2024.2318255.
5

Utopia on the Tabletop
“money” were not the chief components of what was then regarded as wealth.’”6 This alienness is mostly missing from D&D. Think about equipping your character by poring over a list of weapons and kit, just like you are shopping at Walmart. Everything is available, at a list of standard prices, from a faceless and featureless supplier. Every instantiation of, say, a longsword, is functionally identical to every other, just as though it were a mass-produced commodity. Every implied supplier accepts gold pieces like they’re Apple Pay. Money is pretty much just money, indistinguishable from wealth. Magic does mildly unsettle the Walmart-ness, in that acquiring a vorpal sword or wand of polymorph demands an adventure more dramatic than merely asking what aisle. Nonetheless, despite plenty of roll tables to generate quirky and lore-laden magic items, it can be a struggle to keep such loot truly numinous. Sometimes a magic sword is little more than its +1 bonus.
In this collection, three chapters by Emma French, Kelsey Paige Mason, and Jess Wind, critically examine D&D from distinct and complementary angles. They offer windows into the kind of capitalism that D&D is full of, which is among other things racial capitalism. First, French offers a reading of the actual play series The Unsleeping City, and the hopeful ‘intrusion fantasy’ narrative that emerges from this sociotechnical assemblage of players, characters, fans, game rules, digital technologies, dice and so on, which allegorically explores social alienation and disenchantment. The degradation of life under late capitalism is personified as striking supernatural enemies that can and must be confronted and overcome. Wind’s chapter then focuses on how the homebrew D&D supplement Ancestry & Culture: An Alternative to Race in 5e, by Arcanist Press, explicitly tackles D&D’s troubled legacy around fantasy races and biological essentialism. This homebrew approach to reform seems likely to have influenced the official WotC approach, which is explored by Mason in the following chapter. Analysing online discussions around Ancestry & Culture, Wind reveals how racist and antiracist positions are constructed and contested within homebrew creator
6 Jacques Le Goff, Money and the Middle Ages (Cambridge and Malden: Polity Press, 2012), p. 1.
6

Introduction
community discourse. Mason’s chapter offers a detailed critical account of Wizards of the Coast’s recent attempts to redress diversity and representation issues in D&D products. Through close readings of books like Tasha’s Cauldron of Everything and Journeys Through the Radiant Citadel, alongside analysis of WotC’s public statements and business decisions, Mason reveals the contradictory and often superficial nature of such efforts. Mason writes, ‘D&D has the resources and popularity to make meaningful change, not only with regards to their own products, but also in changing the culture of their player-base.’ But fundamental changes to the game’s underlying systems and assumptions have been avoided, in favour of tentative, conservative patches.
Later in the collection, a rich and wide-ranging interview with game designer and facilitator Gabriel Caetano Barbosa kicks off with a critique of the colonialist ideology embedded in D&D and many other mainstream TTRPGs. She explores how D&D's core premise—venturing into foreign lands, killing the inhabitants, and taking their treasure—is fundamentally unsalvageable. Caetano Barbosa’s account lines up well with Mason’s: recent controversies around representation in D&D products demonstrate that the game cannot be fixed through superficial diversity efforts. Instead, she advocates for designers to create radically new games that move beyond the tropes and assumptions of D&D. Caetano Barbosa also discusses her own design work, bursting with mechanical and narrative experimentation, and aiming to enable play centered on uncertainty and hope rather than violent conflict, and offering powerful counternarratives to colonialist fantasies. Game designer and scholar Kellynn Wee shares insights from her ethnographic research on TTRPG play communities in Singapore. She notes the growing popularity of D&D, facilitated by professional play studios that provide immersive experiences with high production values. While these commercial spaces enable wider participation, they also shape play cultures in particular ways. Wee brings an anthropological lens to her work, exploring for the example the nuances of identity and difference in the ways Singaporean players mobilise and navigate D&D’s often Eurocentric discourses. Wee introduces the anthropological interest in everydayness into game studies, suggesting that games may often de-strange rather than estrange, ‘exploring peculiar
7

Utopia on the Tabletop
worlds and peculiar viewpoints by using everyday tools that help us frame our capacity for action regardless of the circumstances.’ Wee also offers frank and probing reflections on her own game design work, especially Move Quietly and Tend Things, a bittersweet utopian experiment that prompts reflection on the costs of building utopia. Move Quietly and Tend Things is set in derelict megastructure somewhere in a flooded Southeast Asia, perhaps the ruins of Singapore’s Marina Bay. Players gradually unearth repositories and relics, and decide how to address difficult unresolved histories.
Across all these varied contributions, D&D emerges as much more than an escapist pasttime. D&D is also a descriptive, a diagnostic, and a performative practice, a practice which reflects the world we really live in and participates in constituting and contesting that world. In fact, perhaps the points at which D&D worlds and the real European Middle Ages diverge most dramatically are not all those cubic gates, spheres of annihilation, sextants of the planes, and rings of feather falling, nor all the cloud giants, beholders, mind flayers, displacer beasts, that guard them—monsters are often just social anxieties and traumas made flesh, after all!—but rather their vastly different political economies and legal and kinship structures. The labyrinthine multifariousness of feudal justice vanishes. Town guards become more-or-less just the police. A guild becomes probably a mishmash of a private member’s club, a trade association, and a powerful corporation. How many D&D campaigns feature moderately accurate medieval households reflecting fealty, life-cycle service, and so on? Or the diverse proto-communist heresies and rebel movements, the likes of the Waldensians, the Dulcinians, the Taborites, the Anabaptists of Münster, the Peasants’ Revolt, the Levellers and the Diggers?
This is not to say that official designers, supplement writers, homebrewers, DMs and players are mistaken in mingling the pre-capitalist with the capitalist. We are playing a game and we can do what we want. In fact, part of the fun can be recreating capitalist modernity in some detail using the ingredients of epic fantasy. For example, the adventuring party itself might resemble a capitalist enterprise, as the long-running actual
8

Introduction
play franchise Acquisitions Incorporated makes explicit in a vaguely satirical way.7
True, the less-well-known details of medieval history could offer utterly fascinating material to play with, for those who want to. But the real point here is more descriptive than it is normative. Mark Fisher influentially described capitalist realism as ‘the widespread sense that not only is capitalism the only viable political and economic system, but also that it is now impossible even to imagine a coherent alternative to it.’8 When we become wizards and knights adventuring in our magical realm, what do we draw from the past, and what do we ignore? The answer is often eerily well predicted by this maxim: If it might unsettle capitalist realism, then it is ignored.
So what are these shadows that emerge, and how do they manage to selectively smother those fragments of our imagination that might matter the most? Partly such shadows are the direct work of the billionaires, the multi-millionaires and the other elites, and all their loyal lackeys, propagandising their preferential future, and against any future that threatens their privilege. But mostly they spring from processes that are much less conspiratorial, much more structural and systemic. Ideology, cultural hegemony, necropolitics, internalised oppression, false consciousness, double consciousness, microaggression, consensus reality, recuperation, appropriation, precaritisation, anti-solidarity, slow violence, economism, left melancholy, the cunning of capital, interlocking matrices of oppression, gusts of cursed amethyst nanotech, something else, all of the above: these are all windows into how the ideas, feelings, desires and aversions that constitute capitalist realism tend to by and large flourish
7 Cf. the Acquisitions Incorporated sourcebook (Wizards of the Coast, 2019), p. 60: ‘It can feel great to give to charity and help those in need. Pretending to care about others can also be a great way to earn favor with governments and nobility, gain tax write-offs, or win over customers. Head Office might suggest (or even require) that a franchise undertake this activity if it has recently gained negative publicity or been discovered to engage in shady activities.’ 8 Mark Fisher, Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative? (Zero Books, 2010 [2009]), p. 2.
9

Utopia on the Tabletop
and multiply, whereas those that fit awkwardly tend to wither or, via a kind of natural selection, mutate and adapt.
To put it another way, they are windows onto pervasive antiutopianism. In some instances, every hesitant hope for a better world, the instant it is sketched in the air, gets treated as if it already burned in the brains of some uber-bureaucrat, who holds the reins to strange barbarous mechanisms bunched in iron gloves. This is one reason why it may be tough to simply do away with utopia, in favour of less awkward concepts. Even if the utopians decide all to walk away from utopia, the anti-utopians will not. Utopia remains strategically significant, and when it has been completely occupied by the anti-utopians, their tourist board will never cease promoting it as the most deceitful, violent, oppressive, and boring city in the universe. This is not a one-size-fits-all justification for insisting on utopia, when sometimes another concept might be more illuminating or strategically useful. But it does suggest that utopia remains an important tool in an ensemble of tools for building better worlds.
Care, Process, and Relationality
Seriously though, why utopia and TTRPGs? You may find that many of the TTRPGs discussed in this book are not utopian in any straightforward way. Most of them are grappling with utopian possibilities in the teeth of intersectional oppression of gender, race, sexuality, disability and other vectors of difference. It is a testament to the skill and imagination of contributors that they have located these objects of interest on the same map as that notorious paradisical no-place. But is it maybe sometimes a bit of a stretch?
Well, stretching can be pretty good for you. Utopian hermeneutics is often about seeking for moments of strong hope within apparently mundane or even dystopian source material. Not only hope, either. In fact utopian practice can be sometimes hampered by the upbeat branding of Utopia Studies, and the expectation to perform inspirational positivity. Sometimes what you really want, unboxing something stamped ‘Utopia,’ is a set of fascinating and grim little tools, hope sold sepearately.
10

Introduction
Nonetheless, most contributors to Utopia on the Tabletop are not only interested in TTRPGs’ potential to revitalise contemporary utopian theory and practice, but fairly optimistic about it too. In her interview, Siân Adiseshiah distinguishes between two wellsprings of utopian thought: the early prose tradition exemplified by works like More’s Utopia, and the theatrical tradition traceable to Greek Old Comedy. The frameworks of Utopian Studies have often privileged the prose tradition, leading to an emphasis on description, the perspective of the amateur ethnographer, a degree of anonymity, and a separation of the cognitive from embodiment, emotion, and affect. Adiseshiah is not primarily focused on TTRPGs, but these observations—together with her explorations of tensions between critical distance and immersive effects, and how utopian drama may probe the boundaries between fiction and reality, and spill over beyond the stage—are highly applicable to TTRPGs. Several other contributors explore how tabletop roleplaying might revitalise utopian imaginaries by reorienting us towards more pluralistic, process-focused, and care-centred utopian practices and possibilities, and by ushering in intriguingly unpredictable energies.
Many contributors are interested not only in narratives and settings, but also the formal features of games, and whether these might offer distinctive utopian resources or affordances. Tyler Brunette’s chapter examines The Book of Cairn and argues that the game's Town Statistics and Harmony mechanics create a procedural rhetoric that models the work required to maintain a small utopian society, while also enacting an ethic of prosocial behavior and collective care around the gaming table. Asu İnci Sert's chapter on Paranoia emphasizes the flexibility of Paranoia’s setting and the latitude it provides Game Masters to adapt, revise, and update its satirical targets.
The theme of failure also appears throughout, in diverse guises and with diverse inflections, but with a general atmosphere of celebration. As Jack Halberstam writes, ‘Under certain circumstances failing, losing, forgetting, unmaking, undoing, unbecoming, not knowing may in fact offer more creative, more cooperative, more surprising ways of being in the
11

Utopia on the Tabletop
world.’9 In theorising generative failure, contributors draw from work across game studies, utopia studies, and gender and queer studies, by such thinkers as Sara Ahmed, Lauren Berlant, Ian Bogost, Jesper Juul, Jack Halberstam, Stefano Harney and Fred Moten, Ruth Levitas, Tom Moylan, José Esteban Muñoz, Bonnie Ruberg, among others. In chapter eleven, for example, Rohtmaa-Jackson and Hughes reflect on their artwork Citadel of Chaos, a collision of tabletop terrain-making with a failed (perhaps) proposal for a spectacular big budget artwork. ‘In Citadel of Chaos the black smoke is not smoke but the stuffing used in soft toys, a failure that acts as a constant reminder of the shifting and evasion of the representation from any concept of a totality.’10 Ben Platt connects Dialect’s approach to lost languages with debates around utopian projects in the 20th century, arguing that the game rehabilitates utopian imagination by reorienting players to find the generative moments within failure. By making language itself a material component of play, Dialect also encourages reflection on how linguistic shifts both reflect and shape the success or failure of intentional communities. The words created in Dialect can also spill over, existing both inside and outside of the magic circle of play. In his interview Doug Geisler discusses his background as a labor organizer and how it has shaped his design practice. Geisler’s Beat the Boss aims to simulate the experience of union organizing, from having oneon-one conversations with workers, to attempting to out-strategise management. While most campaigns in the game end in failure, mirroring real-world statistics, Geisler notes that even failed campaigns can lead to meaningful victories for workers. He also reflects on the educational potential of TTRPGs and how Beat the Boss can serve as a training tool for organizers. Grace A.T. Worm examines indie TTRPG The Treasure at the End of the Dungeon is an Escape From This Dungeon and We Will Never Escape From This Dungeon. Worm argues that while the game portrays an inescapable dungeon, it nevertheless embodies a ‘queer, pragmatic and hopeful’ utopianism through its emphasis on continued struggle, relational
9 Jack Halberstam, The Queer Art of Failure (Durham: Duke University Press, 2011), pp. 2–3. 10 This book, p. 252.
12

Introduction
autonomy, and a process-oriented rather than instrumental, ends-driven approach.11 Drawing on feminist and queer theory, Worm suggests that the game models an ethics of care and a utopian hope founded on embracing the journey of change itself in the face of futility.
Themes of relationality and care are also central to several chapters, including Vivek Santayana’s chapter on Masks: A New Generation. Santayana considers how the game frames superpowers as a complex and fruitful allegory for neurodivergence. The game’s setting of Halcyon City functions as an ambivalent utopia where superpowers are normalised yet not uniformly empowering, mirroring the complex experiences of neurodivergent people. There is also some deeply problematic discourse connecting neurodivergence and superpowers, and Santayana cautions against overly simplistic or homogenising uses of the metaphor. Nonetheless, the game mechanics of Masks, which prominently integrate emotional challenges faced by characters, create a play space for critical reflection on personal and societal understandings of neurodiversity. By focusing on relationality and the development of caring relationships, Masks allows players to glimpse a neurodiverse utopia, much more rich, complex, and difficult than the straw utopias attacked by anti-utopians.
Critical Design, and Plenty More
At the same time, several contributors critically interrogate the limitations of various TTRPGs, and the ways in which they may reproduce neoliberal or technocratic frameworks even as they try to resist them. For example, in chapter three, Nicholas L. Stefanski offers a thoughtfully balanced, and ultimately optimistic reading of the worldbuilding game Arium: Create. Arium embodies a fusion of utopian rhetoric around diversity and creativity with the practices of corporate innovation and strategy workshop. The chapter explores both pitfalls and potentials of “lean worldbuilding,” drawing on Adorno and Benjamin. Ultimately, Stefanski suggests that despite its corporate DNA, Arium may still foster the utopian impulse, moving from the art of the possible to the art of the compossible,
11 This book, p. 68.
13

Utopia on the Tabletop
and the ability to imagine the coexistence of the disparate or even contradictory elements.
To convincingly critique a TTRPG for its capitalist realism, or in some other way, does not necessarily demand being able to articulate an alternative. Nonethless, criticality and creative practice can inform each other. There is a slight shift in the second half of the book toward creative practice. This includes two actual games, as well as four interviews. Caetano Barbosa, Geisler and Wee all reflect directly on their own game design practices, while Adeseshiah illuminates the work of playwrights and theatre-makers such as Howard Brenton, Claire MacDonald, and Mojisola Adebayo. Maurits W. Ertsen’s chapter explores how a serious game of his own design, which he has used in educational settings, relates to broader themes of utopia, dystopia, and social control in the history of irrigation management. Ertsen describes how the game productively challenges assumptions about the relationship between irrigation infrastructure and social and political order. Rather than reproducing a binary between centralised despotism and local cooperation, the game shows how both modes of organisation must be realised through situated actions, allowing participants to experience irrigation as a performed reality. Simon O’Sullivan's chapter narrates a personal history with TTRPGs to explore their significance for debates about fictioning and mythopoesis in contemporary art and philosophy. For O’Sullivan, TTRPGs are not just a vehicle for storytelling but a mode of collective world-building which is inherently linked to utopian desire and future-orientation. At the same time, O'Sullivan emphasises TTRPGs’ capacity to make ideas materially manifest.
Finally, although this volume focuses mainly on tabletop roleplaying games, it to forget Live Action Role-Playing (LARPing) would be unforgiveable. Nordic larps in particular have strong links to collaborative participatory theatre and art, and sometimes seek to prioritise complex narratives and deep character development. They tend to have a different relationship with avant-gardism and with realism, compared with other LARPing traditions. Tova Gerge's chapter reflects on the 2003 Nordic larp Mellan himmel och hav (‘Between Heaven and Sea’), and how the larp's fictional setting—a small isolated community with strictly defined social
14

Introduction
roles and an other-worldly sensual culture—created an ambivalent utopia. Collective roleplay and improvisation within these constraints enabled participants to imagine and enact other ways of being. At the same time, the intensity of the experience risked tipping into a kind of isolationist, sectarian longing. Gerge has kindly offered this chapter as a reprint, prefaced with a new reflection for this collection. Ruth Catlow's chapter is likewise a reprint from a rather more recent collection, as the presence of DAOs in the title might indicate. Catlow makes the case for larp as a methodology for developing the cultures and social relations of DAOs (Decentralized Autonomous Organizations, based on blockchain technology). Catlow shows how larping can serve as a ‘care-ful DAObuilding discipline,’ supporting participants to perceive risks, explore contingencies, and embody the subjectivities demanded by peer-to-peer, trans-local networks.
Critical, Paranoid, and Reparative Play
It is not only within the study of play practices, or the design of new games, that generative criticality can occur. It is also part of play practices themselves. Here Mary Flanagan’s notion of critical play is suggestive. Critical play can blend the categories of designer and player. Flanagan is especially interested in subversive, disruptive, and interventionist play. She describes how players, from Victorian children with porcelain dolls to anxious and sadistic players of The Sims, often inventively subvert ‘expected’ play practices.
Critical play means to create or occupy play environments and activities that represent one or more questions about aspects of human life. These questions can be abstract, such as rethinking cooperation, or winning, or losing; or concrete, involved with content issues such as looking at the U.S. military actions in Cambodia in the early 1970s. Criticality in play can be fostered in order to question an aspect of a game’s “content,” or an aspect of a play scenario’s function that might otherwise be considered a given or necessary. Criticality can provide an
15

Utopia on the Tabletop
essential viewpoint or an analytical framework. Those using critical play as an approach might create a platform of rules by which to examine a speciﬁc issue— rules that would be somehow relevant to the issue itself. Critical play is characterized by a careful examination of social, cultural, political, or even personal themes that function as alternates to popular play spaces.12
Using a utopian lens on TTRPGs might also be framed as a reparative approach, in Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick’s sense. In Touching Feeling (2002), Sedgwick distinguishes between ‘paranoid’ and ‘reparative’ ways of reading.
The unidirectionally future-oriented vigilance of paranoia generates, paradoxically, a complex relation to temporality that burrows both backward and forward: because there must be no bad surprises, and because to learn of the possibility of a bad surprise would itself constitute a surprise, paranoia requires that bad news be always already known […]13
A reparative approach, rather than being primarily defensive or skeptical, is open to the complexities and ambiguities of texts, focusing on healing, rebuilding, and the positive possibilities that might emerge from engagement with cultural artefacts.
Perhaps play, too, has its paranoid and reparative modes. In chapter four, Sert explores the dystopian comedy TTRPG Paranoia, loosely inspired by works such as Orwell’s 1984 and Michael Anderson’s Logan’s Run. In the world of Paranoia, every paranoid suspicion is warranted, whether or
12 Mary Flanagan, Critical Play: Radical Game Design (MIT Press, 2009), p. 6. 13 Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick, Touching Feeling: Affect, Pedagogy, Performativity (Durham: Duke University Press, 2003), pp. 9-10.
16

Introduction
not it is correct, and rich expectations of duplicity and double-dealing form an intricate self-fulfilling prophecy.
It is a critical commonplace that utopia and dystopia are closely linked. They are perhaps more like mirrors or counterparts than they are contraries. Certainly, despite sometimes trying to think of everything, utopian fiction seldom tries to depict societies that are perfectly good in every respect. Nor does dystopian fiction depict societies that are infinitely bad. However, many classic dystopian stories are anti-utopian, in the sense that try to point out the dangers that supposedly inhere in hopes for a more just world. Dystopian stories such as Eugene Richter’s Picture of a Socialistic Future (1891), E.M. Forster’s The Machine Stops (1909), Alduous Huxley’s Brave New World (1932) and George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four (1949) are all examples of this. These stories caution that certain kinds of socialism, and certain uses of technology, would in the long run produce worse results than the evils they seek to remedy. That kind of antiutopianism is perhaps a little less marked in very recent dystopias. It does still hang around. But it has grown more and more difficult to argue that the whirlwind of capitalism, including its effects on the climate and other planetary boundaries, is merely a not-quite-perfect ‘status quo’ that is worth staunchly protecting. Furthermore, no dystopia is simply and purely anti-utopian. Even post-apocalyptic dystopias tear down the world and give us space to imagine its rebuilding.
If Paranoia is the quintessential anti-utopian TTRPG, what is its contrary? What would a session be like of a hypothetical anti-Paranoia— call it Reparatio? Sedgwick writes:
The desire of a reparative impulse [...] is additive and accretive. Its fear, a realistic one, is that the culture surrounding it is inadequate or inimical to its nurture; it wants to assemble and confer plenitude on an object that will then have resources to offer to an inchoate self.
Or perhaps, drawing inspiration from Catlow’s chapter, the kind of utopian culture we need now—whether it is the rebooted blueprints I muse on in the Afterword, or something else entirely—would invite the care-ful
17

Utopia on the Tabletop
reading, the reading that that destabilises the distinction between paranoid and reparative readings altogether? Such a utopian game would repay paranoid play in the sense that would be future-oriented, and interested in pursuing (at least as a heuristic) a situation of no surprises (at least no nasty surprises). But it would also encourage reparative play, existing suspended in a plenitude of nourishing projects, erudite, satiric, deeply invested in the marginal and the trivial, and regularly outfoxing hopelessness and hierarchy.
Similarly, a utopian vision may attract criticism for being too precise, and at the same time for being too vague. These characteristics are not always as sharply opposed as they may at first appear. Certain types of precision and vagueness may spring from a common source. For example, utopians may recognise that being much clearer and firmer than usual about deeply-held principles implies leaving more wiggle room than usual about other things. Another reason why precision and vagueness may, weirdly, go together, is that rules always imply questions about how those rules should be interpreted and applied. That may therefore imply the need for further rules, and so on, ad infinitum. The Real Utopias Project, discussed in the Afterword to this book, tries to address this problem by emphasising real-world experiments and pilots, where that potential infinite regress is simply absorbed into everyday practice. However, here too precision and vagueness may go hand-in-hand. Building sociological research into utopian planning may bring all the messiness and uncertainty intrinsic to quantitative evidence, which would not have been there if such evidence had never been mentioned at all. Similarly, as the detail grows, so may the uncertainties about how to navigate all that detail, or even what qualifies you to navigate and to interpret it.
Finally, perhaps it also comes from the fact that many utopians, justifiably, nurse the hope of healing some collective wrong that hasn’t yet been named. Utopia has a reputation, spread by utopians and antiutopians alike, of being a safe haven for an obscure and significant something. The enduring appeal of utopia goes beyond the list near the beginning of this afterword, justice, ecological sustainability, freedom, and so on. What is this something? A cat? Some sort of holy desire? A seed crystal? An occluded orrery node? ‘There is a grain of sand in Lambeth that
18

Introduction Satan cannot find,’ wrote William Blake. Maybe that then? Drawn by these rumours, a crowd gathers at the gatehouse of utopia: critics, hecklers, fanatics, scholars, Satan looking for his sand, haters, concern trolls, all wielding documents and clipboards and clamouring for answers. Whoever or whatever occupies the guardhouse listens patiently to these demands that this something be handed over. Will it not be brought into the light and laid out in all its particulars, with detailed proofs, budgets and assurances provided? Indeed, there may even be some placatory promise made, that this something is actually on its way, will be here any second. But it never quite materialises. As though its appearance might be some kind of betrayal of trust. Which it might be. This lacuna may be not only greatly desirable, but greatly horrific.
19

Utopia on the Tabletop

Works Cited

Albert, Michael and Robin Hahnel. ‘Participatory Planning’ in Socialist Visions. Boston: South End Press (1983).
Fisher, Mark. Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative? Zero Books (2010 [2009]).
Flanagan, Mary. Critical Play: Radical Game Design. Cambridge: The MIT Press (2009).
Le Goff, Jacques. Money and the Middle Ages. Cambridge and Malden: Polity Press (2012).
Levitas, Ruth. The Concept of Utopia. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press (1991).

Rumpala, Yannick. ‘Fictional varieties of postcapitalism and imaginaries of systemic transformation: mapping alternatives in science fiction and making use of their heuristic potential.’ Culture and Organization (2024). <doi:10.1080/14759551.202 4.2318255>.
Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. Touching Feeling: Affect, Pedagogy, Performativity. Durham: Duke University Press (2003).
Thurm, Eric D., Avidly Reads Board Games. New York: New York University Press (2019).
Wizards of the Coast, Dungeons & Dragons: Acquisitions Incorporated. Wizards of the Coast (2019).

20

Essays
21

2. The Rules of Utopia: The Procedural Rhetoric of The Book
of Cairn
Tyler Brunette
In ‘Back to the Future: Wells, Sociology, Utopia, and Method,’ Ruth Levitas argues that ‘we would be better served both as sociologists and as citizens by a more utopian method, one which embraces the Imaginary Reconstruction of Society (IROS) as an active device in reflexive and collective deliberations about possible and desirable futures.’1 Few activities dovetail better with Levitas’ proposal, one of collective deliberation and active imagination, than that of tabletop roleplaying. Indeed, both utopianism and tabletop roleplaying are often derided by their detractors as mere frivolity, and unworthy of serious consideration. However, as an interactive medium based on cooperative imagination of the possible, tabletop roleplaying games (TTRPGs) offer a unique opportunity for analysis of the practice of the IROS.
In this chapter, I analyze one such game, SoulJAR Games’ The Book of Cairn (Cairn). While at first glance, Cairn appears to be little more than yet another ‘fantasy heartbreaker,’ I argue that Cairn’s combination of unique rules and use of a pastoralist utopian setting function as a method of critique, of both contemporary social conditions, and of the themes embraced by the TTRPG industry more broadly.2 Specifically, I argue, two interlocking rhetorics are built into the rules of Cairn, producing through play of the game, both a sense of what would be necessary to maintain
1 Ruth Levitas, ‘Back to the Future: Wells, Sociology, Utopia and Method,’ The Sociological Review, 58:4 (2010), p. 531. 2 The term ‘Fantasy Heartbreaker’ is a term often used among TTRPG enthusiasts to refer to an independently published roleplaying game in the mold of Dungeons & Dragons. The term, while often used derisively, also is used, as it is here, to connote that a game is deserving of more interest from the community than it will likely ever receive. See Ron Edwards, ‘Fantasy Heartbreakers,’ The Forge, March 2002. <www.indie-rpgs.com/articles/9/>
22

Brunette: The Rules of Utopia
(albeit imperfectly and abstractly) a small pastoralist utopian society and also an enactment of those activities around the gaming table. Before turning to my analysis of Cairn and the implications of its rules, I first address the theoretical underpinnings of my approach. After my analysis, I conclude by discussing the limits of Cairn’s IROS.
Literature
For Levitas, utopias are not just an object of study, but a method resulting in the IROS. She explains, ‘Utopia creates a space in which the reader is addressed not just cognitively, but experientially, and enjoined to consider and feel what it would be like not just to live differently, but to want to live differently. As a result the taken-for-granted nature of the present is disrupted.’3 Utopias function as an implicit (or explicit) critique of society. They do so not only by articulating what a better society could look like, but also by emphasizing the contingent character of things the reader may take for granted. Even if the reader eventually decides they prefer reality to the utopia, they can better understand that reality as neither natural nor inevitable. In these ways, the utopian act of imagining a reconstructed society shares obvious similarities to tabletop roleplaying. As Webb notes, ‘The process of reconstruction itself requires imaginative abstraction from everyday life, with thought detaching itself from existing circumstances and transcending reality.’4 For Levitas, the IROS serves critics in three functions, archeologically, architecturally and ontologically. Archeologically, the IROS serves as a way of digging through popular and political discourse to unearth significant fragments, assembling them into a coherent concept of a better society, which the critic can then display for scrutiny and critique. Architecturally, the IROS offers the critic a holistic modeling of alternatives. And ontologically, the IROS allows for the individual and collective to both imagine themselves differently.5 Levitas’
3 Levitas, ‘Back to the Future,’ p. 542. 4 Darren Webb, ‘The Bitter Product of Defeat? Reflections on Winstanley’s Law of Freedom,’ Political Studies, 52 (2004), p. 211. 5 Levitas, ‘Back to the Future,’ pp. 543-544.
23

Utopia on the Tabletop
call for scholars to embrace the IROS as a way of rescuing utopia from the pressures of capital, industry, and fixed accounts of ‘human nature’ (especially evolutionary psychology) has resulted in the technique being adopted for the analysis of a variety of texts, from poetry to architecture.6
These authors’ positioning of utopias as both critique and critical tool dovetails with the other primary theoretical lens I bring to Cairn, procedural rhetoric. In ‘Utopia as Method, or Uses of the Future,’ Fredric Jameson suggests that analysis of utopia can be done along lines of both content and form, while also complicating the distinction between the two (the construction of freeways to Los Angeles, he suggests, ‘might be thought of as a philosophical concept in its own right’).7 In the TTRPG, content broadly corresponds to the narrative worldbuilding elements of the game, which establish the setting, history, non-player characters, and all other narrative material. In contrast, the form of a TTRPG refers to the rules which govern player interactions with the narrative elements. A particularly useful lens for the analysis of rules systems, specifically game rules, is Ian Bogost’s concept of procedural rhetoric. As the name implies, procedural rhetoric draws from the rhetorical tradition’s study of persuasive expression. As Bogost explains, ‘procedural rhetoric is a technique for making arguments with computational systems and for unpacking computational arguments others have created.’8 Thus, just as the utopic IROS is dual natured, functioning as both method and critique, procedural rhetoric is similarly dual natured, both a critical tool and an
6 Juan G. Ramos, ‘Utopian Thinking in Verse: Temporality and Poetic Imaginary in the Poetry of Nicanor Parra, Mario Benditti, and Roque Dalton,’ Hispanófila 178 (2016), pp. 185-203; Mikkel Nørregaard Jørgensen, ‘Horizons Without Borders: Wendy Trevino’s “Cruel Fiction” and the Utopian Poetry of the Commune,’ Studies in Arts and Humanities 5(1) (2019), pp. 49–66; and Gizem Deniz Guneri, ‘On Varieties of Architectural Utopianism: A Critical Reading of the Twentieth Century Utopian Architecture,’ Proster 27(1) (2019), pp. 152-163. 7 Fredric Jameson, ‘Utopia as Method, or the Uses of the Future,’ in Utopia/Dystopia: Conditions of Historical Possibility, eds Michael D. Gordkin, Helen Tiley, and Gyan Prakash (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2010), p. 23. 8 Ian Bogost, Persuasive Games: The Expressive Power of Videogames (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010), p. 3.
24

Brunette: The Rules of Utopia
artifact of analysis. Procedural rhetoric argues that the rules of games propose models not only for how the world works, but how players can interact with it and each other. The processes which construct the model reward and punish specific actions within the model and thus shape both the play of the game, but also the players’ perception of that which it models. Over time, through interaction with procedures, the logic of those procedures influence the players, seeding changes in attitudes, values, and beliefs.9
While Bogost uses the idea of procedural rhetoric exclusively to analyze the rules systems of videogames, he makes clear that procedurality is not confined to the digital, making room for procedural rhetorical approaches to a host of human enacted processes, including tabletop gaming.10 Drawing from Bogost’s explanations of procedural rhetoric, Schallegger notes that TTRPGs are particularly invested in procedurality: ‘The narration of RPGs is carried by the players’ interaction with the mechanics and dynamics of the game. If there is no interaction, there is no game.’11 In short, in TTRPGs, both players and rules mediate the gameplay. Rules provide a framework for the players to interact with in the creation of stories, and the physical possibilities, metaphysical conventions, and ideological implications of those rules implicitly shape the types of stories that can and will be told by players.
The Utopia of Cairn and its Rhetorical Implications
Published in 2014, The Book of Cairn is a fantasy TTRPG set in a distant future where humanity has been destroyed by the gods, called Bright Ones, and anthropomorphic animals have replaced them as the dominant sapient species. Players play as animal characters from the eponymous village of Cairn, a pastoral utopia in the mold of Tolkien’s Shire. Unlike
9 Bogost, Persuasive Games, p. 340. 10 Bogost, Persuasive Games, p. 10. 11 René Reinhold Schallegger, The Postmodern Joy of Role-Playing Games: Agency, Ritual and Meaning in the Medium (Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Company, 2018), pp. 92-93.
25

Utopia on the Tabletop
most settings in traditional fantasy TTRPGs, Cairn is bereft of serious danger. There is no ancient evil awakening and threatening the land, the dragons are quite reasonable and hospitable, and there are no dungeons full of evil creatures to slay. The authors of Cairn take pains to differentiate the setting from the often-dystopic traditions of fantasy TTRPGs, explaining, ‘You may think this setting was intentionally created devoid of conflicts, and you’d be right.’12 The reasoning given for this deviation, is that Cairn is meant to develop small-scale drama, befitting the small scale of the sentient woodland creatures players portray. To facilitate this smallscale drama, the authors of Cairn developed two subsystems which not only structure play, but produce strong procedural rhetorical arguments regarding utopia, community, and sociality. The first of these, Town Statistics, drives much of the action and is the impetus for PCs to adventure. The second, Harmony, both individualizes the stakes of adventuring beyond the traditional fantasy TTRPG’s use of violence, and gives PCs an important reason to return to their utopic homes. While each of these subsystems produces its own procedural rhetoric, taken together, they offer a clear argument about the work required to maintain a pastoral utopia. In both cases, these rules prompt players toward character actions that are prosocial in the effort of maintaining the utopia of Cairn.
Much as characters have statistics in Cairn, the village of Cairn also is abstracted into numerical statistics: Food (representing the food and water resources), Resources (the material resources of the town, such as lumber and stone), Morale (the collective self-esteem of the citizenry), and Security (the towns capacity to survive catastrophic dangers). All four statistics are raised and lowered through the course of play. When the players successfully complete an adventure, the Narrator raises the town statistic most associated with that adventure. For example, an adventure to determine why pumpkins are disappearing from a farmer’s fields would likely increase the Food score, while an adventure to repair a bridge used to access the local woodlands might raise Resources. Additionally, the players can collectively select a statistic to be raised. If the Narrator determines that the adventure was unsuccessful, for instance if the players
12 The Book of Cairn (SoulJAR Games, 2014), p. 20.
26

Brunette: The Rules of Utopia
were unable to catch the pumpkin thief, then no statistics are raised. After three adventures have been attempted, the season changes to winter, all town statistics are reduced by one, and the Narrator rolls on the Winter Effects table, which has an over ninety percent chance of lowering at least one additional statistic.
The abstraction of the state of the utopia of Cairn mandates that PCs seek to solve problems for their community before they spiral out of control. The addition of the random element of statistical decay drives players to focus their adventures broadly, and to think holistically about the wellbeing of their community. Unlike most fantasy TTRPGs where the impetus for adventure is the slaying of evil monsters or the collecting of treasure, Cairn’s procedurality positions adventuring as a prosocial activity, one meant to reinforce ties to community, and strengthen that community, instead of providing a reason to leave it. Failure, then, is not just a personal setback, but one in which a whole community can suffer as a result. Similarly, success is a shared success, one where the whole IROS is made more resilient, in an easily seen and measured way, resulting from PC actions. The mechanics are moderately forgiving, however: the town of Cairn can tolerate a failed adventure every two years, without noticeable decline.
The procedural rhetoric of the Town Statistics mechanics of Cairn argues that utopias, even imaginary ones, are not self-sustaining. Work is necessary to keep a small pastoral utopia from running low on food, resources, morale, and security. Players are positioned as caretakers of their community, as opposed to wandering transients in search of gold, experience points, or monstrous others to slay. The process of maintaining the central IROS thus serves as an implicit critique of the violent transience otherwise characteristic of fantasy TTRPGs. It suggests, implicitly, not just a better possible future for TTRPG settings, but also what it could feel like to do the work of maintaining a pastoral utopia. This caretaker role is further enriched by Cairn’s other highly distinctive mechanic, Harmony.
Harmony is a sliding scale mechanic measuring how well a character is abiding by the rules of the compact established by the Bright Ones. In short, it is a morality and mental wellbeing indicator. The Harmony scale
27

Utopia on the Tabletop
ranges from -10 to 20, with higher numbers representing more adherence to the compact and lower numbers representing deviation. This scale is broken into four states. If a character is at 16 or higher Harmony, they are in a state of ‘grace’ and receive a variety of mechanical benefits, such as doubled critical success chance, the ability to sense low Harmony people and objects, and additional Harmony rewards when celebrating. If a character has a Harmony score between 1 and 15, they are in a state of ‘balance’ and the Harmony System provides no bonuses or penalties. A score between 0 and negative 10 puts a character into ‘discord,’ doubling their skill roll failure rate, allowing for critical failures, and allowing enemies bonus actions to attack them in combat. If a character’s Harmony rating falls below -10, they become ‘dire,’ and the Narrator is instructed to take over the character and use them as a villain for future stories.13
While death is rare in Cairn, the Harmony system can potentially take a character away from a player, and create a new adversary for the group. Players are thus encouraged to maximize Harmony gains and mitigate Harmony losses. Harmony is gained through ‘defeating the unnatural’ (an intentionally ambiguous wording, meant to encourage non-violent solutions), by ‘restoring balance to nature’ (such as disrupting magical artifacts or cleansing a woodland of a corrupting blight), and by ‘celebrating’ (a catch-all term for prosocial activities, such as visiting sick friends, hosting a dinner party, or helping someone weed their garden). Conversely, Harmony is lost through displays of violence, carrying metal equipment (which is otherwise mechanically more effective than bone, wood, leather, and stone tools), casting magical spells, and encountering the unnatural (such as a long forgotten human relic). Whenever a character would lose Harmony, they have a chance to avoid the loss by succeeding on a Willpower skill check. Additionally, some character professions reduce a character’s maximum Harmony score.
The interaction of Town Statistics and Harmony results in a cyclical nature of play. Characters leave on adventures, in order to raise flagging Town Statistics. On such adventures they will likely engage in violence, encounter the unnatural, equip themselves with metal armor and tools, or
13 Cairn, pp. 186-188.
28

Brunette: The Rules of Utopia
have pressing reasons to use magic. Depleted of Harmony, they must then return to Cairn to recover both physically and spiritually from their time away from their community. Players and storytellers are required to roleplay out activities that raise Harmony, rather than just bringing it back to maximum between adventures (in the manner that the game treats Health and Mana Points). Essentially, while bodies will heal on their own and Mana will refill, one’s morality and social connectedness requires active effort to maintain and repair in Cairn.
The Harmony rules of Cairn create a procedural rhetoric of arithmetic moral clarity. Which actions will or will not potentially result in Harmony loss are already known ahead of time by the players, and the only question is the amount of Harmony that they might lose. Furthermore, the clearly enumerated scale of Harmony provides players with a constant monitor of their character’s moral positioning. The advantages of high Harmony and the disadvantages of low Harmony reinforce the need for constant selfsurveillance and self-management, as low Harmony not only impacts the player’s play experience but can create future problems for the rest of the playgroup if the character becomes dire and is removed from the group.
At first blush, this procedural rhetoric is unremarkable, in that it seemingly reproduces discourses of neoliberalism which call for isolated individuals to undertake continuous self-surveillance and selfimprovement. However, the Harmony system of Cairn differs from this neoliberal logic in a number of key ways. Unlike the limitless selfimprovement demanded by neoliberal capitalism, Harmony has an upper limit. In Cairn, one, in fact, can be good enough! Additionally, because the ways individuals regain Harmony are social and community based, and the threat of low Harmony impacts the entire IROS developed through the play of the game, Cairn re-situates moral and mental wellbeing as a collective concern, rather than an individualized moral failing. Whereas the calls for continuous self-improvement under neoliberalism drive isolation and perpetual work, Cairn’s Harmony rules invite an active shared responsibility for moral and social wellbeing of self and others alike.
This procedural rhetoric of collective concern for moral wellbeing has impacts that can spill over from the storytelling. Because maintaining Harmony scores above zero is incentivized, because Harmony maintenance
29

Utopia on the Tabletop
must be roleplayed at the table, and because Harmony is primarily regained through prosocial activities, the rules for Harmony transform the social environment of the table. The responsibility for keeping Harmony scores high is collectivized. Players must actively participate in one another’s social, mental, and moral wellbeing. The activities of adventuring and care are not marked by gender, race or class. All players participate fully in socially reproductive labor, which is framed as celebratory. Harmony not only implicitly critiques the disconnected nature of most fantasy TTRPG adventurers, but because it is part of an IROS, provides an experience of what an egalitarian community of mutual aid and care might encompass.
In Levitas’s terms, Cairn not only gathers together potential ingredients of a good society (the archeological mode), and assembles them into a coherent holistic model (the architectural mode). Cairn also gives players ways of educating our desire, educating our hope, and ‘imagining ourselves otherwise’ (the ontological mode). The IROS’s ontological mode concerns fundamentally different ways of being, asking us, what kinds of beings might we be? Can we go beyond merely picturing these ways of being, and start to occupy them, in our perceptions, attitudes, and experiences? Recurring and cyclical persuasive games such as Cairn can reinforce such ontological shifts, in ways that other non-ludic IROS may otherwise neglect.
By collaboratively enacting utopia, we are also collaborating on an implicit critique of current conditions. Or, in Bogost’s terms, strong procedural rhetoric in Cairn not only has the potential to persuade, it can also spark reflection by players. Bogost explains, ‘procedural rhetoric also produces simulation fever. It motivates a player to address the logic of a situation in general, and at the point at which it breaks down and gives way to a new situation in particular.’14 In the case of Cairn, the cyclical play created through the Town Resources and Harmony rules works, at the least, to unseat and disrupt the predominant logic of the reasons for and results of adventuring work in fantasy TTRPGs. Motivations and results of adventuring are shifted from the personal to the communal.
14 Bogost, Persuasive Games, p. 333.
30

Brunette: The Rules of Utopia
Cairn argues that utopias will take work, sometimes alienating work, and that in a better world, caring for and dealienating those laborers will need to be a shared, rather than personal, responsibility. Furthermore, as all TTRPGs engage in at least some IROS, the experience of caring for community and each other inherent in the mechanics of Cairn gives a sensation of how we might be otherwise which is ‘the beginning of utopian desire for a better life and a better world.’15
None of this is to say that Cairn’s approach toward structuring the utopic IROS is without flaw. The world of Cairn is heavily modeled on a nostalgia for a European communal village life that never was, rather than any actual premodern European practices of commoning, gift exchange or mutual aid, not to mention a vast array of Indigenous approaches to caretaking that currently fight for survival, such as the Australian Aboriginal ‘work for country’ or the Dakota ‘being in good relations.’16 Beyond the privileging of European aesthetics and modes of engagement with both the social and natural world, this focus on a bygone pastoralism threatens to divert attention from more feasible utopian imaginings.17 Furthermore, the destruction of humanity and replacement with anthropomorphic animals in Cairn replicates a common and problematic trope of utopia/dystopia media, whereby social and ecological collapse is romanticized as the solution to injustice, rather than an exacerbation of injustice that disproportionately impacts the vulnerable.18 Additionally, the small scale of the communitarian utopia presented in Cairn reifies common critiques arguing that better societies are only available on the small scale. Yet, as Levitas reminds us, all utopias are necessarily multiple, and provisional. While Cairn’s content is heavily invested in a mythic European pastoralism, which does undercut the critical elements its play generates through the IROS, the procedural rhetoric of the game does
15 Levitas, ‘Back to the Future,’ p. 544. 16 Deborah Bird Rose, ‘Anthropocene Noir,’ ARENA Journal 41/42 (2013-2014), pp. 217-219; and Kim Tall Bear, ‘Caretaking Relations, Not American Dreaming,’ KALFOU 6(1) (2019), pp. 24-41. 17 Janet Fiskio, ‘Apocalypse and Ecotopia: Narratives in Global Climate Change Discourse,’ Race, Gender & Class (19):1, 2012, pp. 21-22. 18 Fisko, ‘Apocalypse and Ecotopia,’ p. 14.
31

Utopia on the Tabletop critique the logic and practice of both most fantasy TTRPGs and current social conditions, while giving players a space for imagining and experiencing a better social world. The procedural rhetoric of Cairn makes clear that not only should the utopic IROS be extended beyond the academy, but that the academy should take such imaginings more seriously.
32

Brunette: The Rules of Utopia

Works Cited

Bogost, Ian. Persuasive Games: The Expressive Power of Videogames. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press (2010).
Edwards, Ron. ‘Fantasy Heartbreakers,’ The Forge, March 2002. <www.indierpgs.com/articles/9/>
Fiskio, J. ‘Apocalypse and Ecotopia: Narratives in Global Climate Change Discourse,’ Race, Gender & Class (19):1, 2012, pp. 12-36.
Guneri, Gizem Deniz. ‘On Varieties of Architectural Utopianism: A Critical Reading of the Twentieth Century Utopian Architecture,’ Proster 27(1) (2019), pp. 152-163.
Jameson, Fredric. ‘Utopia as Method, or the Uses of the Future.’ In Utopia/Dystopia: Conditions of Historical Possibility eds Michael D. Gordkin, Helen Tiley, and Gyan Prakash. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press (2010).
Jørgensen, Mikkel Nørregaard. ‘Horizons Without Borders: Wendy Trevino’s “Cruel Fiction” and the Utopian Poetry of the Commune.’ Studies in Arts and Humanities 5(1) (2019), pp. 49–66

Levitas, Ruth. ‘Back to the Future: Wells, Sociology, Utopia and Method.’ The Sociological Review, 58:4 (2010), pp. 530-547.
Ramos, Juan G. ‘Utopian Thinking in Verse: Temporality and Poetic Imaginary in the Poetry of Nicanor Parra, Mario Benditti, and Roque Dalton,’ Hispanófila 178 (2016), pp. 185-203
Rose, Deborah Bird. ‘Anthropocene Noir.’ ARENA Journal, 41/42 (20132014), pp. 206-219.
Schallegger, René Reinhold. The Postmodern Joy of Role-Playing Games: Agency, Ritual and Meaning in the Medium. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company (2018).
Carroll, Mark, Paul Caughell, Ross A. Isaacs, Mike Nystul, James Silverstein, and others, The Book of Cairn. SoulJAR Games (2014).
TallBear, Kim. ‘Caretaking Relations, Not American Dreaming.’ KALFOU. 6:1 (2019), pp. 24-41.
Webb, Darren. ‘The Bitter Product of Defeat? Reflections on Winstanley’s Law of Freedom.’ Political Studies, 52 (2004), pp. 199-215.

33

3. Post-it Utopia: The Promises and Pitfalls of Arium’s Lean Worldbuilding
Nicholas L. Stefanski
The worldbuilding TTRPG Arium: Create by Adept Icarus promises a utopian procedure for creating gameworlds that are generative, safe, and liberating environments for roleplayers, an undertaking animated by recent debates over the prevalence of harmful, stereotypical, or simply repetitive tropes throughout the TTRPG industry. While the shift away from these problematic tropes is admirable and perhaps overdue within the industry, Arium’s approach to addressing this issue is also notable for its enthusiastic endorsement of creativity techniques stemming from the world of corporate management and innovation consulting. Specifically, Arium’s Lean Worldbuilding approach shares many commonalities with the Lean management philosophy that emerged in the 1990s, largely inspired by Toyota’s operating model. Both Arium’s Lean and Lean as it is now understood in business are associated with the pervasive use of Postit notes for ideation and collaboration.
This chapter explores how Arium’s utopian solutionism and endorsement of a signature technique of post-Fordist management presents both pitfalls and opportunities for inventive, utopian roleplay. Beginning in the critical mode, I suggest that by adopting techniques that reduce the art of imaginative worldbuilding to a ritualized formula, Arium: Create risks building worlds that are creative merely for the sake of creativity, and consensual mainly in their appeal to the lowest common denominator. Inspired by Adorno and Horkheimer’s critiques of jazz and the culture industry, and following Eitan Wilf’s ethnography of Post-its and critiques of the innovation and creativity industry, the first movement of the chapter asks whether such strategies of routinized, commodified creativity can only ever produce the ‘freedom to choose what is always the
34

Stefanski: Post-It Utopia
same.’1 Nevertheless, while this danger should not be ignored, I argue that it would be wrong to dismiss Arium or to label it as utopian in only the pejorative sense. Taking cues from theorists responding to Adorno’s pessimistic stance toward popular culture, notably Adorno’s Frankfurt School colleague and interlocutor Walter Benjamin, the second movement of the chapter suggests that despite its embrace of corporate solutionism, Arium’s collaborative worldbuilding contains a generative kernel, revealing an additional movement in the dialectic between oppressive technologies of control and the utopian impulse.
In order to resolve this gap between the two possible readings of Arium, the Adornian and the Benjaminian, I rely upon a humble but illuminating critical methodology: actual play! Upon my first close reading of Arium’s marketing materials, the parallels to critiques of the culture industry that use Post-its as a fetish for the creative process seemed self-evident, and I was poised to judge Arium harshly. Yet, as I assembled a play group and gave Arium: Create a playthrough, the second, generative utopian movement began to suggest itself. While critiques of corporate creativity culture certainly apply to Arium, my experience of actual play suggests that the game manages to stumble towards the affirmatively utopian, even as it fails to deliver on its promise of permitting only an idealized mixture of setting and tropes.
The ultimate goals of this chapter are twofold: first, to explore Arium as an artifact occupying a particularly kairotic position within contemporary cultural discourse, poised as it is at the fault line between corporate managerial technocracy and contemporary social justice activism; and second, to suggest that play, described here as a critical methodology, gestures toward a theory of the utopian that allows us to reassess the dialectic between ‘critical’ and ‘blueprint’ utopias. Specifically, I argue that utopia is that which offers an education in the art of the compossible.
1 Theodore Adorno and Max Horkheimer, Dialectic of Enlightenment, trans. Edmund Jephcott (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2002), p. 136.
35

Utopia on the Tabletop
Arium and the Critique of Post-it Creativity
Arium RPG is a TTRPG system designed for creating, playing in, and evolving bespoke fictional game worlds, or ‘ariums,’ for roleplaying. The game system consists of two distinct publications, Arium: Create and Arium: Discover, each available in either digital PDF format or as a bound paperback zine.2 This chapter focuses on Arium: Create, the publication devoted to worldbuilding. Although the publisher Adept Icarus is a newcomer to TTRPG publishing, and Arium is at most a mid-sized participant in the rapidly expanding ecosystem of crowdfunded tabletop projects, Arium: Create features utopian marketing rhetoric, a selfconscious response to perceived problems with the worldbuilding tropes of the broader TTRPG industry, as well as an enthusiastic mobilization of neoliberal corporate innovation techniques, that make it a potential ideological bellwether for the TTRPG world and an illuminative artifact of study.
Arium’s utopian rhetoric occurs at the intersection of two influential constellations of contemporary rhetoric: the increasingly assertive, social justice-focused TTRPG consumer activism on one hand, and the practices and ideologies of corporate management ‘creativity’ culture on the other. To begin with the former, in recent years the TTRPG hobby has come under increased scrutiny from critics, online activists, and consumers regarding tropes with racist, misogynistic, or simply derivative and repetitive legacies used in worldbuilding and game design.3 While diversity and representation within the hobby are complex, multi-causal and deepseated issues, Arium’s marketing materials recast the problem as simply one of inadequate creativity. As the game’s marketing materials ask, ‘Why
2 Drew Gerken, Natasha Ence, and William Munn, Arium: Create (Adept Icarus, 2020). 3 For Dungeons & Dragons’s 2020 announcement of a strategy aiming at more progressive depiction of fantasy races, including the removal of negative racial traits for Orc and Kobold player characters, removal of Roma stereotypes characterizing fictional Vistani humans, and the inclusion of content warnings on some of their older products, see Wizards of the Coast/D&D Team, ‘Diversity and Dungeons & Dragons’ (2020). <dnd.wizards.com/articles/features/diversity-and-dnd>.
36

Stefanski: Post-It Utopia
play in someone else’s sandbox when the whole group can have a blast creating their own?,’ suggesting that if only a TTRPG’s setting could be engineered to contain just the right mixture of tropes, such problems could be neutralized.4
The ‘better living through creativity’ frame clearly connects Arium with neoliberal ideologies of corporate creativity and innovation, and the point of suture is none other than the Post-it note. Arium: Create’s Lean Worldbuilding method proceeds as follows: first, a timed ideation phase in which participants write up to three ideas on Post-its, strictly one idea per note; second, a collaborating phase in which the GM and participants group notes that are either similar or perhaps harmonize with one another into clusters; and finally, a voting phase determining which clusters will be included in the final, built game world. In practice, the clustering phase involves a high degree of deliberation and of the GM recording, handling, sticking, unsticking, and re-sticking the ubiquitous Post-it notes according to the collaborative preferences of the players. The three phases are then iterated across an increasingly narrow series of worldbuilding steps: Universal, Big Picture, Culture & Organizations, Landmarks, People, and Goodies (the latter refers to items or ‘loot’).5 Arium intends that each step be productively constrained by the preceding steps; the Universal step of my first game session produced a ‘neo-noir, modern fantasy world that blends sci-fi and magic featuring Western criminal mafias in an apocalyptic wasteland with society versus world themes’ with the exact nature and extent of magic, role of the mafias, geography and bestiary of the wasteland, and so forth further delineated in the subsequent steps. The Post-its, and more importantly the reification of potentially complex ideas into portable, recombinant nuggets that the notes encourage, play a key role in every phase.
Post-it note invention comes to Arium via a direct lineage from similar techniques used by the innovation and creativity consulting industry, often servicing Silicon Valley startups and Fortune 500 companies. This appetite
4 Adept Icarus Team, Arium RPG (Kickstarter, 2021). <www.kickstarter.com/projects/adepticarus/arium> 5 Gerken, Ence, and Munn, Arium Create, p. 23.
37

Utopia on the Tabletop
for Post-its arises within a more general inclination of the corporate world toward provocative but largely unproven pseudoscientific creativity techniques, most notably the ‘lateral thinking’ craze of the 1970s based upon the works of Edward de Bono and his successors. Arium’s lead designer, William Munn, worked for several years within this constellation as a corporate creativity consultant, and credits that experience with inspiring Arium’s Lean Worldbuilding.6
It should perhaps be unsurprising that the Post-it would arrive to capitalize on the TTRPG industry’s crisis of tropes: as Eitan Wilf’s critical ethnography of the innovation and creativity industry has shown, the Postit has become a key technology of post-Fordist corporate management.7 Wilf’s ethnography shows how two of the Post-it note’s physical properties make it an alluring, but ultimately problematic technology for promoting invention. First, the small size of the notes gives rise to a condition of pragmatic ambiguity because in order to fit on a single note, complex ideas must be reduced to their most basic form.8 This hyper-distillation of ideas can accomplish the beneficial function of loosening our assumptions about an idea’s typical context, but at the cost of potentially removing so much context that the underlying idea becomes ambiguous to the point of meaninglessness. Wilf’s ethnography humorously describes creativity seminar participants focusing intently on the supposedly deep and illuminative contradiction at play in ‘tools versus dialogue,’ as suggested by the juxtaposition of two Post-it notes, yet when pressed, no participant could explain the idea that either of these notes was intended to convey.9 Second, Post-its’ weak adhesive properties, purportedly an enhancement to the mobility of ideas and chance combinations, in practice often results in chaos when the notes fail to stick as intended and scatter about the floor.10
6 Gerken, Ence, and Munn, Arium Create, p. 6. 7 Eitan Wilf, ‘The Post-it Economy: Understanding Post-Fordist Business Innovation through One of Its Key Semiotic Technologies,’ Current Anthropology 57 (2016), p. 732. 8 Wilf, ‘The Post-it Note Economy,’ p. 733. 9 Wilf, ‘The Post-it Note Economy,’ p. 738. 10 Wilf, ‘The Post-it Note Economy,’ p. 748.
38

Stefanski: Post-It Utopia
Arium play sessions illustrate how the very same qualities of the Postit that seem to facilitate mobile ideation also lead inevitably and simultaneously to its breakdown, and furthermore, that this breakdown is actually necessary to producing the consensus promised by the game. While the material affordances of Post-its enhance the mobility and recombinancy of ideas and generation of insights, these very same properties can cause the invention process to reverse into meaninglessness.11 Yet importantly, this meaninglessness need not always take the form of gibberish or communicative noise, but rather the blandness of broadly acceptable pablum. In my own Arium session, the single Universal-step note ‘society versus world’ proved to be very popular and was continually voted along for inclusion in the final Arium. Yet when pressed, no participant was able to explain this note’s meaning. Of course, intuition can legitimately contribute to creative collaboration and to democratic deliberation. However, to the extent that Arium positions its worldbuilding as consensus decision-making, the difficulty players encounter in trying to explain their votes draws into question whether consensus is used as a means of confronting and unpacking nuanced and thorny points of contest, or rather as a means of papering over these difficult issues while still celebrating the justness and novelty of the result. Furthermore, some ‘Landmark’ notes such as ‘Black Sea’ proved initially popular, but support for the note similarly evaporated after the note’s author was asked to specify whether the note referred to the Eurasian body of water or rather the general concept of a black-colored fantasy sea. In these cases, pragmatic ambiguity enabling participants to fudge a consensus by skirting disagreement may, at worst, allow a vapid or meaningless note to pass; however, in other cases, such as with my sessions’ ‘antagonistic matriarch’ note, the note’s ambiguity could allow it to evade the very process of creating a safe space for roleplay free from gendered stereotypes promised by the game.
11 McLuhan’s tetrad of media effects has described the tendency of a medium to reverse into its opposite when pushed to its limit. Marshall McLuhan and Eric McLuhan, Laws of Media: The New Science (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1988), p. 107.
39

Utopia on the Tabletop
Wilf describes how, in the corporate setting, the ritual of moving notes around and fitting them to a pre-arranged template conforms to the presumed paradigm of ‘what an insight should look like.’12 Such ritualization can lead to a kind of innovation for the sake of innovation, relatively distanced from any need to justify its social usefulness or ethical acceptability. Because Arium takes place within the distinct social space that Huizinga calls the “magic circle” of gameplay,13 Arium not only participates in such ritualization, but may even intensify it.14 Experienced TTRPG players are already habituated to trust the dice, or other aspects of a game’s resolution engine, as a fair, neutral arbiter for the outcome of the collaborative narrative. By gamifying the worldbuilding process under the mantle of TTRPG play, Arium extends the magic circle’s ambit to include the worldbuilding process itself as well whatever mixture of tropes it happens to mash together. Thus, if a note such as ‘antagonistic matriarch’ manages to join a coalition that makes it through the voting process, it is presumed to be not only consensual, but also carries the halo of having survived the magic circle. In my game, I noted that some players seemed to have some hesitancy surrounding the inclusion of the note; however, they were reluctant to voice that hesitancy after it had passed Arium’s prescribed voting process.
The ritualized Post-it innovation at play in both Arium and the corporate setting both conforms to and normalizes the rapid turnover and superfluous recombinancy characteristic of late capitalist production. In the corporate setting, it is easy to see how Post-it invention’s ability to produce, on demand, innovation merely for the sake of innovation accelerates the turnover of capital through the creation of endlessly iterative new products, services, and even free updates to digital services that nevertheless generate monetizable views and clicks. When a group of executives gathers for a bout of Post-it invention, they are guaranteed to produce a combination of concepts that is both nominally new and carries
12 Wilf, ‘The Post-it Note Economy,’ p. 748. 13 Johan Huizinga, Homo Ludens: a Study of the Play-Element in Culture (Boston: Beacon Press, 1955), p. 10. 14 Wilf, ‘The Post-it Note Economy,’ p. 748.
40

Stefanski: Post-It Utopia
the halo of having been produced through the ritualistic process; whether the resulting combination is any good is seemingly beside the point. Indeed, Arium advertises its ability to create worlds with ‘time traveling sasquatches kidnapping kids’ or ‘an underwater society on the far side of the universe that could easily be at home in the works of Lewis Caroll’ without pausing to ask whether that particular combination of tropes is really something we actually need, or poses any novel or interesting questions for roleplay.15
The very leanness of Arium’s signature Lean Worldbuilding is also suggestive of the relationship between ideologies of creativity and the rhetoric of neoliberal austerity. As Oli Mould has shown, creativity, as a normative social value, is often invoked as a cover for austerity and defunding of social programs as individuals and institutions are entreated to become more creative in the face of being asked to do more with less.16 In place of the laborious and time-consuming processes of traditional fictional worldbuilding including J.R.R. Tolkien’s creation of the Elvish language, Kim Stanley Robinson’s detailed study of Martian geography and landforms, N.K. Jemisin’s interdisciplinary extrapolative reasoning across science, economics and culture, or teams of full-time, salaried professionals in the writer’s rooms at Wizards of the Coast or Catalyst Game Labs, Arium suggests that we can rapidly crowdsource the process using only the tropes that already exist collectively in the minds of the participants, as long as we are armed with Post-it notes, a timer, and just the right procedural creation technique. In this, it resembles many other rules lite worldbuilding TTRPGs, though in pushing the contentless approach to the limit, it is a particularly notable exemplar. In practice, this style of lean collaboration often produces gaps and inadequacies that will have to be addressed either by the GM after the worldbuilding session or through improvisational roleplay, not unlike neoliberal austerity’s tendency to nominally cut costs by pushing additional labor and risks onto workers, and their family and support networks, without compensation.
15 Gerken, Ence, and Munn, Arium Create, p. 6. 16 Oli Mould, Against Creativity (London: Verso Books, 2019), p. 100.
41

Utopia on the Tabletop
As we have seen, Arium diagnoses the growing unrest with traditional TTRPG tropes as a crisis, and it responds to the crisis with the creative destruction characteristic of neoliberalism.17 As an observation made in tech writer Tom Goodwin’s digital column—later achieving prominent ephemerality as a viral text macro—characterizes these deliberately disruptive new business models: ‘Uber, the world’s largest taxi company, owns no vehicles. Facebook, the world’s most popular media owner, creates no content. Alibaba, the most valuable retailer, has no inventory. And Airbnb, the world’s largest accommodation provider, owns no real estate.’18 Arium Create aims to join this growing constellation as a TTRPG book that features no characters, no maps, no stat blocks, no campaign settings, nor any of the other standard components of the medium. Instead, in response to the perceived crisis Arium sells us the utopian promise of unlocking our own creative potential as experienced through its signature worldbuilding procedure. This contentless approach has the added advantage of shielding the designer and publisher from the types of controversies surrounding identity and representation currently faced by D&D and other legacy TTRPG franchises. Along with its content, Arium effectively crowdsources the responsibility for safe and consensual roleplay to its players. While it may be laudable to sweep aside the subtly (and not so subtly) entrenched misogyny and racism of ‘old school’ TTRPG settings, one should remain mindful of the ways in which neoliberal methods and ideologies quickly move in to fill the void.
Because it creates value from the interplay of its own proprietary procedures and the ideas, inclinations, and desires of its players, Arium, despite being played on pen and paper, might be understood as an instance of what Mould calls algorithmic creativity or even ‘algocracy.’19 Under conditions of algocracy, our lives are increasingly determined by the outputs of digital algorithms posing as neutral organizers of data, even as
17 David Harvey, ‘Neo‐Liberalism as Creative Destruction.’ Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography 88 (2006), pp. 145-158. 18 Tom Goodwin, ‘The Battle is for the Customer Interface,’ (Tech Crunch, 2015). <techcrunch.com/2015/03/03/in-the-age-of-disintermediation-the-battle-is-all-forthe-customer-interface/> 19 Mould, Against Creativity, p. 130.
42

Stefanski: Post-It Utopia
they extract value from the data produced by the algorithms users themselves. In the gaming world, algorithmic creativity in the form of procedural content generation has become a hot topic among scholars studying digital games; however, consider that traditional pen and paper TTRPGs are perhaps among the earliest implementers of procedural content generation.20 In addition to the obvious use of stochastic dice rolls to decide outcomes, since the earliest days of D&D and Tunnels & Trolls TTRPGs have always used paper procedural generation tables to assist GMs with implementing the details of an emergent narrative, such as wandering monster appearances, NPC reactions and behavior, and even impromptu quests or adventure hooks.21 While in one sense Arium simply amplifies this existing TTRPG practice, creating a procedure for generating the entire campaign setting itself, it also participates in monetizing its players’ own capacity to create content and marketing it back to them in a way that echoes Web 2.0 monetization practices—the expectation that producers and consumers will merge into prosumers, and the utopian promise that crowdwork, supported by well-designed algorithms, will make all their work feel like play anyway.
Works such as Wilf’s critique of the Post-it note and my initial reaction to Arium: Create assume a thoroughly pessimistic critical stance toward technocratic attempts to administrate creativity through the manipulation of tropes and other cultural material, a critical stance that has been indelibly marked by Adorno’s critiques of the 20th century of mass culture. Along with his collaborator Max Horkheimer, Adorno, with great prescience and sophistication, shows how the culture industry stripped cultural production of both the salt of truth contained in traditional peasant cultures and the potential for spontaneity and newness opened up by bourgeois high culture, instead engaging in a standardization of cultural production and for the first time bringing it reliably within the ‘realm of
20 Mathew Guzdial and others, ‘Tabletop Roleplaying Games as Procedural Content Generators,’ International Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games (2020). <arxiv.org/pdf/2007.06108.pdf> 21 Gillian Smith, ‘An Analog History of Procedural Content Generation,’ FDG (2015). <sokath.com/home/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/smith-fdg15.pdf>
43

Utopia on the Tabletop
administration.’22 Adorno and Horkheimer show how the outputs of the culture industry such as 20th century Hollywood films plunder the repertoire of the classics for familiar tropes and plot structures, and then produce economically safe but artistically unremarkable blockbusters by adding lead actors and cinematographic effects according to industry formulas. This process is strikingly similar to the way Arium’s Post-it invention takes tropes already accepted and internalized by its players, purging them of objectionable content through consensus voting, and then combining them with similar tropes in a nominally new yet largely predictable arrangement. Old, recycled tropes appearing on the Post-its are reanimated, recombined and sent into battle fresh off the assembly line as if reanimated by a steampunk necromancer, yet when they arrive they have nothing to tell us but the same old stories once again.
Yet this same culture industry, Adorno and Horkheimer also contend, can simultaneously celebrate and cultivate all kinds of novelty, disruption, and spontaneity, so long as these proceed according to strict, safely administered formulae. In his essays on jazz, Adorno again takes aim at attempts to standardize and ritualize the creative process. Adorno argues that jazz’s much-celebrated improvisational character is itself standardized, scripted, and pasted on in a half-hearted attempt to cover over an underlying commercial sameness: ‘The elements in jazz in which immediacy seems to be present, the seemingly improvisational moments— of which syncopation is designated as its elemental form—are added in their naked externality to the standardized commodity character in order to mask it-without, however, gaining power over it for a second.’23 Although jazz scholars have contested how much Adorno actually knew about jazz, the essays are notable for further theorizing the process by which the universally valorized qualities of improvisation and change might themselves function as pseudo-creative lures of the culture industry, and it is precisely this form of ‘creativity on demand’ that Arium: Create now offers to the TTRPG world.
22 Adorno and Horkheimer, Dialectic of Enlightenment, p. 104. 23 Theodor Adorno, ‘On Jazz,’ trans. Jamie Owen Daniel, Discourse 12 (1989), p. 48.
44

Stefanski: Post-It Utopia
Arium as Training for the Utopian Imagination
Adorno’s critiques of the culture industry’s attempts to standardize creativity and bring it ‘within the realm of administration’ clearly implicate Arium to an uncomfortable degree; however, the works of Walter Benjamin, Adorno’s Frankfurt school colleague, offer hope for a more positive assessment of the game. While Benjamin does not deny the oppressive aspects of 20th century mass culture, he also takes care to show how, despite their problematic effects, such artifacts nevertheless also participate in a dialectic that opens up new opportunities for practicing human freedom on a mass scale. Notably, Benjamin shows that while mass technological reproducibility may have indeed destroyed the ‘aura’ of authenticity and creativity relied upon by the singular works of earlier eras, it simultaneously does us a service by freeing the masses from a ‘parasitic subservience to ritual’ and thus clearing the way for a new forms of attention to and engagement with creative works.24 For 20th century mass media, such novel forms of attention included the development of an ‘optical unconscious’ revealed by the technical affordances of photography as well as film.25 Rather than simply lamenting the public’s infatuation with at times repetitive and formulaic instances of media photography and film, Benjamin instead shows how mass attention to the camera’s ‘resources for swooping and rising, disrupting and isolating, stretching or compressing a sequence, enlarging or reducing an object’ have in some respects enhanced the collective sensibility of the masses.26 Public attentiveness to the microsecond (perhaps further enhanced in our own time through ubiquitous instant replay technology) and to the smallest details of people, objects and environments have arisen in this way.
24 Walter Benjamin, ‘The Work of Art in the Age of its Technological Reproducibility,’ in Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings Volume 4, trans. Edmund Jephcott and others, ed. Howard Eiland and Michael Jennings (Cambridge: Belknap Press, 2003). 25 Walter Benjamin, ‘A Short History of Photography,’ Screen 13 (1972), p. 7.; Walter Benjamin, ‘The Work of Art in the Age of its Technological Reproducibility,’ p. 266. <academic.oup.com/screen/articleabstract/13/1/5/1730936?redirectedFrom=PDF> 26 Benjamin, ‘The Work of Art in the Age of its Technological Reproducibility,’ p. 266.
45

Utopia on the Tabletop
It is again Wilf’s ethnography, in a very different environment than the Post-it infused corporate boardroom, that allows us to see something like the Benjaminian dialectic applied to more recent technical developments impacting the relationship to creativity. Almost as if in retort to Adorno, Wilf looks at technology-assisted efforts to teach, imitate, and recombine the improvisation and creativity of past jazz masters through technologies such as The Amazing Slow Downer, an immersive digital audio program that allow jazz students to ‘fuse’ with the playing past jazz masters.27 The results complicate the prevailing Western understanding of creativity as an authentic and wholly original process, exemplified by the auratic works of the Romantic and earlier periods, and certainly having little to do with rote copying. Yet the technologically-assisted jazz students do seem to build a capacity for improvisation by copying the improvisation of the masters, enacting a kind of ritual in which the student ‘inhabits’ the improvisation of the masters at technologically adjustable speeds, thus enabling them to reenact them as the experience of their own improvisation.
As my own play sessions of Arium: Create unfolded, it seemed increasingly plausible that Arium’s own technical reproducibility can also provide a similar kind of training in genuine creative capacity of the type explored by Benjamin and Wilf. Although Arium’s standardization and iterability indeed implements the kind of assembly line of cultural tropes that would make Adorno cringe, it can also perform a significant teaching function, prompting new players to ‘inhabit’ critical thinking and invention in a way not unlike the students in Wilf’s jazz ethnography. For instance, recall that during the first ‘Universal’ ideation step, my group overwhelmingly voted that a ‘criminal mafias’ note be included in the final game setting. Of course, as a discrete Post-it, ‘criminal mafias’ is laden with tropes and cultural stereotypes. Yet as play progressed and the note had to be integrated with other notes into a coherent roleplay setting, the common mafia tropes and stereotypes began to drop away. As new notes
27 Eitan Wilf, ‘Rituals of Creativity: Tradition, Modernity, and the ‘Acoustic Unconscious’ in a U.S. Collegiate Jazz Music Program,’ American Anthropologist 114 (2012), pp. 32-44.
46

Stefanski: Post-It Utopia
were added in subsequent phases, a persistent question became where the actual ludic content of the game would take place (or ‘where is the power struggle,’ as asked by my players) relative to the already-included criminal mafias: within a single crime syndicate, between two crime families, between the mafias and society, or a combination of the three? Eventually, as the participants discussed integrating the mafia note with popular notes from later phases (‘magical families,’ ‘hereditary magic,’ ‘clankers vs. casters’), the mafias gradually morphed into neo-aristocratic families of magi and the locus of criminality shifted from organized crime to the criminality of a corrupt society itself, in which the ruling magi class exploits an underclass of dieselpunk technicians. As the players thought more deeply about the type of ‘mafia’ setting they wanted to actually play in, and how it could work ludically with the other notes, the mafia trope was investigated and opened up for critical reassessment in order to preserve the meat of the desired ludonarrative content (the ‘power struggle’) while casting the unnecessary, stereotypical baggage aside. Thus, while Arium largely advertises itself as a problem-free engine for the efficient selection and recombination of acceptable pre-existing tropes, as actual play unfolds, the challenge of making such tropes fit together into a setting in which one might actually want to spend time roleplaying potentially shifts the focus to an interrogation of the internal contradictions within these tropes themselves. It must be noted, though, that this doesn’t always happen, as with the ‘antagonistic matriarch’ note mentioned previously.
It is Arium’s very standardization and iterability, the qualities most disparaged by the critical Adornian reading, that are instrumental in prompting its players to engage in the interrogation or opening up of potential tropes. If the technologized jazz classroom studied by Wilf develops sensibility to an ‘acoustic unconscious’ modeled upon the ‘optical unconscious’ Benjamin saw revealed by the reproducibility of photography and cinema, then Arium’s iterability can develop its players’ sensibilities to a ludonarrative unconscious. While the concept of ludonarrative, or the intersection of a game’s ludic and storytelling elements, is typically used
47

Utopia on the Tabletop
to spotlight any inconsistencies or ‘dissonance’ between the two,28 I use ludonarrative unconscious more generally to describe the gaming public’s immersion in and attunement to the broader megatext of tropes, game mechanics, and concepts relied upon to construct the gaming experience. Our level of attunement to the workings of this unconscious background can be altered by the types of artifacts and technologies we routinely encounter. If we recognize Arium’s iterative Lean Worldbuilding as a technology of perception, not unlike photography or The Amazing Slow Downer, its ability to sharpen sensitivity to the ludonarrative unconscious becomes apparent. Consider that the public audience of TTRPG players has been habituated to react to ludonarrative tropes in one of two ways: either normalized by their ubiquity and hence accepted uncritically; or the opposite, singled out by professional critics as dissonant, immersionbreaking, or otherwise problematic and then unreflectively rejected by the gaming public. Arium, intentionally or not, repeatedly prompts players to operate in a third, middle register: once a given Post-it has been voted for inclusion in the final arium, as the standardized invention sequence proceeds players must tarry with the trope for a prolonged period, and engage in discussion about how the trope contained on the note can be made to fit with other, seemingly disparate tropes in a setting that could actually function for a roleplaying game. When this process is iterated, both within the creation of a single arium and potentially across multiple plays, it can prompt players to engage in a style of nuanced judgement of TTRPG setting tropes that exceeds the familiar acceptance or rejection binary. This process is not what Arium promises, a formula for constructing a safe space by iterative audit and exclusion of problematic tropes. Instead, it is much more Benjaminian in spirit, offering players the chance to meditate dialectically on how mass production is not easily separable from uniqueness, how contract and consensus are not easily separable from violence, and how, even as the culture industry has relentlessly impoverished human culture and experience, people may take what first appears as loss instead as an opportunity to ‘free themselves
28 Clint Hocking, ‘Ludonarrative Dissonance in Bioshock,’ Click Nothing (2007). <clicknothing.typepad.com/click_nothing/2007/10/ludonarrative-d.html>
48

Stefanski: Post-It Utopia
from experience […] for a world in which they can make such pure and decided use of their poverty.’29 It may even be considered education in the art of the compossible: challenging players to suspend contradictory ideas simultaneously, and to grow attuned to the ways these ideas repel each other or collapse into each other.
Clearly, we cannot make strong generalizations about what it is like to play Arium, since this will vary group by group. It is a ritual which emphasizes whatever values and knowledge the players happen to have brought with them, and one that can bestow a halo of legitimacy on them. Although it is possible to supplement pre-existing knowledge by doing research or seeking outside voices, the system does not explicitly encourage this. Thus, in much the same way that participants in an innovation workshop are almost guaranteed to convince themselves they are having deep insights, since the workshop gives them ‘what an insight should look like’ (Wilf q.v.), there is the risk that any Arium group will find some way to convince itself that whatever it is doing is revolutionary, or at least somewhat progressive. At its worst, this forced overproduction of undertheorized solutions may participate in what Adorno called ‘actionism,’ or the constant demand from protestors and activists that, whatever the situation, we must above all always do something, a call which may lapse into obsessional activity and a regressive, uncritical instrumentalism: ‘At this time, no higher form of society is concretely visible: for that reason whatever acts as though it were in easy reach has something regressive about it.’30 Better, perhaps, to resist the call to constantly act, do, and produce, and instead expend more effort envisioning in greater detail the type of society that might be able to address our problems with nuance and sophistication.
However, actual play of Arium at least shows that Post-it invention can operate rather differently in the game room than in the boardroom.
29 Walter Benjamin, ‘Experience and Poverty.’ In Selected Writings: 1927-1934, vol. 2, trans. Rodney Livingstone, ed. Howard Eiland, Gary Smith, and Michael W. Jennings (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1996), p. 734. 30 Theodor Adorno, ‘Resignation,’ in Critical Models: Interventions and Catchwords, ed. T.H. Pickford (New York: Columbia University Press, 2005), p. 292
49

Utopia on the Tabletop
Building upon Wilf’s description of the Post-it, it becomes clear that boardroom Post-it invention thrives by enabling Post-its to function as ‘floating signifiers’ that freely index a variety of disparate, or even contradictory desires such as the initially exciting discovery of a seemingly deep contradiction between ‘tools versus dialog.’31 The temporary euphoria that accompanies the creation of a new such signifier is a ‘utopia’ of pure negation, in which widespread, but ambiguous dissatisfaction with the status quo is projected onto the promise of a new product or the latest technocratic methodology which is imagined as the solution to all problems yet may evaporate under the slightest scrutiny. Although this thrilling moment of negation contains a utopian kernel, the enthusiasm for the new all too easily becomes a ruse of a culture industry that standardizes and sells the very concept of newness over and over again as rapidly as possible. Yet, while it must be conceded that Arium also participates in the lure of the empty signifier (recall the excitement for the ultimately empty ‘society versus world’ note), this is seldom the ultimate focus of gameplay. After the moment of euphoria fades, players are left with a series of Postits that must be rearranged and maneuvered extensively, and the notes come to function less as floating signifiers and more as training tools for exercising the utopian imagination. It could even be said that Arium succeeds, in large part because it fails: while the flaws of Post-it invention identified by Wilf allow for a fudging of consensus that fails to effectively prohibit unwanted or disjointed tropes, the call to create a coherent, playable game world in spite of this fact often leads to probing discussion and thoughtful invention.
Conclusion: Arium as Education in the Art of the Compossible
How, then, should Arium be judged in the final analysis? Keeping both the Adornian and Benjaminian readings in mind can reveal how the game participates in the utopian dialectic, and perhaps more importantly, can
31 Jeffrey Mehlman, ‘The floating signifier: from Lévi-Strauss to Lacan’ Yale French Studies (1972). pp. 10-37.
50

Stefanski: Post-It Utopia
help formulate a theory of the utopian that is useful in our current moment. As this chapter has shown, Arium’s impulse to craft a standardized process for building ideal roleplaying worlds can be viewed as both the mass deception of the culture industry or as an opportunity to constructively exercise the faculties of imagination. Theorists working within utopian studies have attempted to craft a framework for resolving this judgment of particular utopian works, with ‘blueprint utopias’ that attempt to lay out determinate procedures or structures often judged harshly, and less prescriptive ‘critical,’ ‘ambiguous’32 or ‘iconoclastic’ utopias given more praise. As Russell Jacoby writes:
Inevitably, history eclipses or ridicules the most daring plans; it makes them appear either too banal or too idiosyncratic. Worse, such plans often betray more a will for domination than for freedom; they prescribe how free men and women should act and live and talk, as though they could not figure this out for themselves. I turn instead to the iconoclastic utopians, those who dreamt of a superior society but who declined to give its precise measurements. In the original sense and for the original reasons, they were iconoclasts; they were protesters and breakers of images.33
This current critical consensus might well pronounce Arium, and its prescriptive procedures that promise a straightforward, procedural solution as an instance of the ‘bad’ or blueprint type of utopia, insufficiently iconoclastic in Jacoby’s sense. The fear is that a blueprint utopian artifact like Arium will seduce us with its too-neat procedures (‘just follow these six easy steps to a perfect world!’) and lull us into a bland complacency while still allowing us to imagine ourselves as agents of radical change, as in Adorno’s theorization of the culture industry. This
32 Tom Moylan, ‘Beyond Negation: The Critical Utopias of Ursula K. Le Guin and Samuel R. Delany,’ Extrapolation 21 (1980), p. 236. 33 Russell Jacoby, Picture Imperfect: Utopian Thought for an Anti-utopian Age (New York: Columbia University Press, 2005), p. xvi.
51

Utopia on the Tabletop
position is by far the dominant critical posture for utopian artifacts today; in fact I myself was quite ready to paint Arium with this brush prior to actually playing the game.
Yet there are reasons to rethink the critical consensus against blueprint utopias, particularly in our historical moment. As Terry Eagleton notes, there is something of a contradiction in many utopian scholars’ tooneat blueprint against blueprinting, as our utopianism can fail just as readily by prescribing too little about the shape of the future as too much.34 But perhaps the contradiction is not located within the work of the antiblueprinters, but is rather an irony formed by the trajectory of history itself: 20th century commentators may have been right to fear various forms of totalitarian certitude ready to proclaim their own end of history, while in our time, the capacity to map out some kind, any kind of possible path out of our current malaise of apathy and powerlessness in the face of global environmental collapse is precisely what we most lack. The double bind of the blueprint-iconoclasm debate looms ominously over our era of climate crisis and environmental collapse. What should we fear more—the lure of implausibly quick techno-fixes based on vague promises and unproven technologies underwriting the continuance of business-as-usual for the fossil fuel industry? Or a mass lapse into hopelessness, denial, and collective inaction rendered more palatable by individual virtue signaling and personal carbon footprint fetishization?
The type of utopianism that is needed today, and that Arium in part pushes toward, is one that does not opt for either pole, but instead lingers as long as it can at the fault line between blueprint and iconoclasm. Utopia becomes interesting at the moment just after the euphoria of pure negation, when the blueprint is just beginning to be sketched out, and the possible outcomes suffer from neither the monomania of totalitarian ideology nor the bad infinity of the culture industry. Today, utopia must be that which offers education in the art of the compossible, meaning how
34 Terry Eagleton. ‘Just My Imagination.’ The Nation (2005). <www.thenation.com/article/just-my-imagination/>
52

Stefanski: Post-It Utopia
the disparate elements of a world can exist together.35 The greatest literary utopias reside in this space of cultivating a fragile compossibility, such as carefully planning for the compossibility of a just and plentiful human society within a fragile biosphere, and the ability of a work to linger there for an extended period without falling to either pole is an impressive authorial achievement.36 While the worlds created by Arium’s players may not rise to that level, Arium provides a jerry-rigged but workable template dwelling in this interstitial space of compossibility through its very proceduralism and iterability. Though it may participate in the rote repackaging of culture detested by Adorno and others, Arium’s contribution is to function as a pedagogical aid that helps first-time worldbuilders develop the skills in the art of the compossible through its very streamlining and iterating of the worldbuilding process.
Arium, of course, cannot fix climate change, nor can it reliably inoculate us or our tabletops against racism, sexism, transphobia, or any of the other ills faced by TTRPG enthusiasts and the societies in which they reside. But Arium’s value, as for any utopian work, lies not in its capacity to produce actual solutions, but instead in its creation of a practice of exercising the beneficently constrained collective imagination. When an Arium-built world inevitably fails to live up to the promises offered its shiny veneer and too-smooth implementation of neoliberal Post-it collaboration, it also offers its players the opportunity to dig in and pursue a much messier practice of collaboration by striving to think the compossibility of incongruous and problematic elements even, or perhaps especially, when that compossibility is ultimately doomed to fail. And here, Arium’s glittering exterior and signature processes reveal that, although they
35 For an explanation of the term’s original use by Leibniz, see James, Messina and Donald Rutherford, ‘Leibniz on compossibility.’ Philosophy Compass 4 (2009), pp. 962-977. 36 As I have argued elsewhere, Kim Stanley Robinson’s Mars Trilogy enacts a particularly productive form of rhetorical invention by grounding itself in a ‘planetary topics,’ itself a form of germinal blueprinting. Nicholas Stefanski, ‘Why not pitch the whole enterprise at the highest level possible?’: Speculative Radicalism and the Planetary Topics’ (Doctoral Thesis, University of Pittsburgh 2020), p. 7. <dscholarship.pitt.edu/39452/19/Stefanski%20Final%20ETD.pdf>
53

Utopia on the Tabletop perhaps may be just more widgets of the culture industry designed to sell our own creativity back to us in a neat and marketable package, the very smoothness, speed, and iterability of that packaging opens up an opportunity for players to dwell that much more frequently at the elusive fault line between blueprint and iconoclasm.
54

Stefanski: Post-It Utopia
Works Cited

Adept Icarus Team. Arium RPG Kickstarter (2021). <www.kickstarter.com/projects/ade pticarus/arium>
Adorno, Theodor. ‘On Jazz,’ trans. Jamie Owen Daniel. Discourse 12 (1989), p. 45.
Adorno, Theodor. ‘Resignation,’ in Critical Models: Interventions and Catchwords, ed. T.H. Pickford. New York: Columbia University Press (2005).
Adorno, Theodor and Max Horkheimer. Dialectic of Enlightenment, trans. Edmund Jephcott. Stanford: Stanford University Press (2002).
Benjamin, Walter. ‘A Short History of Photography,’ Screen 13 (1972), p. 5. <academic.oup.com/screen/articleabstract/13/1/5/1730936>
Benjamin, Walter. ‘Experience and Poverty,’ in Selected Writings: 19271934, vol. 2, trans. Rodney Livingstone, ed. Howard Eiland, Gary Smith, and Michael W. Jennings. Cambridge: Harvard University Press (1996).
Benjamin, Walter. ‘The Work of Art in the Age of its Technological Reproducibility,’ in Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings Volume 4, trans. Edmund Jephcott and others, ed. Howard Eiland and Michael Jennings. Cambridge: Belknap Press (2003).

Eagleton, Terry. ‘Just My Imagination.’ The Nation (2005). <www.thenation.com/article/justmy-imagination/>
Gerken, Drew, Natasha Ence, and William Munn. Arium: Create. Adept Icarus (2020).
Goodwin, Tom. ‘The Battle is for the Customer Interface.’ Tech Crunch (2015). <techcrunch.com/2015/03/03/inthe-age-of-disintermediation-thebattle-is-all-for-the-customerinterface/>
Guzdial, Mathew and others. ‘Tabletop Roleplaying Games as Procedural Content Generators.’ International Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games (2020). <arxiv.org/pdf/2007.06108.pdf>
Harvey, David. ‘Neo‐Liberalism as creative destruction.’ Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography 88 (2006)
Hocking, Clint. ‘Ludonarrative Dissonance in Bioshock.’ Click Nothing (2007). <clicknothing.typepad.com/click_not hing/2007/10/ludonarratived.html>
Huizinga, Johan. Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play-Element in Culture. Boston: Beacon Press (1955).
Jacoby, Russell. Picture Imperfect: Utopian Thought for an Anti-utopian Age. New York: Columbia University Press (2005).

55

Utopia on the Tabletop

McLuhan, Marshall and Eric McLuhan. Laws of Media: The New Science. Toronto: University of Toronto Press (1988).
Moylan, Tom. ‘Beyond Negation: The Critical Utopias of Ursula K. Le Guin and Samuel R. Delany.’ Extrapolation 21 (1980).
Mehlman, Jeffrey. ‘The floating signifier: from Lévi-Strauss to Lacan.’ Yale French Studies (1972).
Messina, James and Donald Rutherford. ‘Leibniz on compossibility.’ Philosophy Compass 4 (2009).
Mould, Oli. Against Creativity. London: Verso Books (2019).
Smith, Gillian. ‘An Analog History of Procedural Content Generation,’ FDG (2015). <sokath.com/home/wpcontent/uploads/2018/01/smithfdg15.pdf>

Stefanski, Nicholas. ‘“Why not pitch the whole enterprise at the highest level possible?”: Speculative Radicalism and the Planetary Topics.’ Doctoral Thesis, University of Pittsburgh (2020). <dscholarship.pitt.edu/39452/19/Stef anski%20Final%20ETD.pdf>
Wilf, Eitan. ‘The Post-it Economy: Understanding Post-Fordist Business Innovation through One of Its Key Semiotic Technologies.’ Current Anthropology 57 (2016).
Wilf, Eitan. ‘Rituals of Creativity: Tradition, Modernity, and the “Acoustic Unconscious” in a U.S. Collegiate Jazz Music Program,’ American Anthropologist 114 (2012).
Wizards of the Coast/D&D Team, ‘Diversity and Dungeons & Dragons’ (2020). <dnd.wizards.com/articles/features/ diversity-and-dnd>

56

4. The Perfect (Anti) Utopia of the Alpha Complex: A Look into
Paranoia RPG and Satire of the Utopia
Asu İnci Sert
Tabletop roleplaying games have always been a tool of expression and creation. What makes TTRPGs a unique mode of culture is their combination of collaborative worldbuilding, character creation, and storytelling: blending rules, play, and narrative in distinctive generative ways. Within this unique cultural mode, the theme of anti-utopia is particularly richly realised in the classic game Paranoia, first published in 1984. This brief chapter analyses how anti-utopia and satire are employed in Paranoia, while mentioning how its inspirations affected both the genre and the setting of the game.
Dystopia vs Anti-Utopia: What is the Difference?
Before examining Paranoia, it is essential to define what ‘anti-utopia’ is. Lyman Tower Sargent argues that the terms dystopia and anti-utopia are often used to mean the same thing, but that such a substitution is inaccurate. In contrast to dystopia, anti-utopia is a term used to ‘describe those works that use the utopian form to attack either utopias in general or a specific utopia.’1 Therefore the Paranoia game and its setting can be described as anti-utopian rather than dystopian. As satire is a crucial element of anti-utopias and this game itself, it is also important to examine what exactly Paranoia satirises. According to the lead designer (as of January 2021) of Paranoia, WJ MacGuffin, Paranoia originally satirised ‘anti-communism from the Cold War,’ with Paranoia XP satirising
1 Lyman Tower Sargent, ‘Three Faces of Utopianism Revisited,’ Utopian Studies, Vol. 5, No. 1 (1994), p. 8.
57

Utopia on the Tabletop
capitalism and ‘the latest edition [replacing] communism with terrorism since that’s the closest analogue right now.’
Rules of Paranoia and Why You Should Break Them
Paranoia, while it is a tabletop roleplaying game, is drastically different from well-known conventional TTRPGs such as Dungeons & Dragons or Call of Cthulhu. While many TTRPGs promote cooperation and working as a team rather than individual characters, Paranoia seems to aim for just the opposite. In fact, in the 2009 rulebook Paranoia Troubleshooters, a section titled ‘What you must forget’ clearly states that the concept of ‘[s]olidarity among characters or players’ should be abandoned as it will ‘interfere drastically with the PARANOIA experience.’2
While it is important to bend and break the rules of this unique TTRPG, it is also helpful to know certain core elements before attempting to change them. Firstly, one must understand the world that the characters are thrown into and what it means for the gameplay. Most, if not all, Paranoia games take place in the fictional underground bunker-like living space called the ‘Alpha Complex.’ The origin and history of Alpha Complex are never explicitly explained but rather hinted at by the game developers and, subsequently, game masters (or GMs). During gameplay, this elusiveness is what keeps the players on their toes. The players and their characters alike are strongly discouraged from asking questions about the setting and its historical context. The GM achieves this discouragement through nonplayable characters such as other citizens, and most commonly, the ‘Friend Computer.’ The Friend Computer (sometimes also referred to as simply The Computer) is the arguably insane artificial intelligence responsible for all the systems of the self-contained Alpha Complex. The Computer’s main aim is to eliminate any and all threats of treason within the Complex. The definition of a threat is usually any treasonous activity by ‘mutant commie traitors.’ However, what constitutes treason is left purposefully ambiguous in order to preserve the sense of paranoia and
2 Eric Goldberg and Greg Costikyan, Paranoia Troubleshooters (Swindon: Mongoose Publishing), p. 6.
58

Sert: The Perfect (Anti) Utopia of the Alpha Complex
unease. As The Computer aims to keep Alpha Complex as the perfect utopia that it supposedly is, any negative behaviour can be seen as treason. For example, failing to be, or at least seem, happy at all times is a great offence in the Alpha Complex. With the rules about what is and is not treason changing all the time, the players and their characters have no choice but to humour the paranoid and often illogical whims of an artificial dictator. One can argue that the unpredictability of The Computer as well as the ever-changing rules is reminiscent of Orwell’s 1984 with its clever depiction of writing and rewriting of history and people’s seemingly extremely short-term memory.
Another concept used to keep the players and characters in the dark is the usage of ‘security clearances.’ One can observe rigid stratification in the Alpha Complex society, with its citizens each having a specific security clearance. Security clearances measure ‘The Computer’s current level of trust in [a character].’ The different security clearances are represented by different colours of the spectrum starting from infrared being the lowest level of security clearance and ending with ultraviolet ‘high programmers.’ Through certain acts and missions, Alpha Complex citizens can be promoted from infrared to red, orange and so on. The citizens are required to wear garments of their specific security clearance (with infrared citizens wearing black and the highest-ranked ultraviolets wearing white) and reside in quarters of the same colour. This stratification is so severe that the characters are forbidden from being present in any environment that does not match their specific clearances. The GM here has the opportunity to task the player characters with a mission that would be impossible to complete without going through areas that are above their security level and expect them to navigate through disobeying direct orders while trying to survive.
Although the player characters have been grouped together up to this point in the paper, one should not mistake this phenomenon as cooperation. The main goal of each character (apart from survival) is to uncover their teammates’ treasonous acts in an attempt to cover up their own treason. In fact, the unique gameplay aspect of Paranoia sees the players act with utmost suspicion and distrust in order to prove that all the other player characters are traitors before their own treason is
59

Utopia on the Tabletop
revealed. In this sense, Paranoia’s name is an immensely fitting one as, throughout the game, the players are encouraged to trust no one and act exclusively for the self-interests of their own characters.
These self-interests sometimes come in the form of ‘secret societies’ of which all the characters are a part. The players must navigate through their mission given by The Computer while also keeping contact with their secret societies to carry out their orders. These secret societies vary in the sense of their aims and goals. For example, a character may be a part of ‘Death Leopards’ whose main goal is to have fun through the means of destruction and defiance, or ‘Humanists’ who believe that The Computer must be brought under the control of humans. As the players are not aware of the others’ secret societies, any small gesture or secret note to the GM contribute to the overall feeling of paranoia and immense distrust. For this very reason, private notes between players and GMs are strongly encouraged. A secret message to GM may provide classified communication with the character’s secret society, another non-playable character or The Computer. As the other players have no way of knowing the nature of the note and to whom it is addressed, every piece of paper (or line of text during online games) is treated as life-changing and/or threatening.
While self-preservation is an essential part of the gameplay, death in Paranoia is not final. In fact, at the beginning of the game, each player is presented with six clones of their character in the case of their inevitable demise. Therefore, a ‘shoot first, ask questions later’ approach is not only appropriate but commonplace in the universe of Paranoia. Character deaths can be a part of a joke, a way to make a point or simply futile. This inconclusiveness of death greatly contributes to the competition aspect of Paranoia and how the characters interact with each other. The rules are discarded and broken not only by the GM but also the players who attempt to create a narrative from which their characters can benefit. The technical side of the game is often overlooked for the sake of interesting storytelling and world-building.
Moreover, because the main element of an anti-utopia, as well as the specific anti-utopia of Paranoia, is satire, it is easy to customise the setting in many ways. The GM has the liberty to change not only the technical
60

Sert: The Perfect (Anti) Utopia of the Alpha Complex
rules but also many elements of the setting according to their own sociocultural context, the players and their respective values, and what they aim to make a satire out of or criticise. Their creative freedom is one of the key elements of the Paranoia experience. Customising certain aspects of gameplay and world-building is not only allowed but also encouraged. One can say that Paranoia satirises many aspects of the modern society, including xenophobia, distrust among people, and a seemingly neverending bureaucracy. However, in reality, Paranoia can satirise whatever one sees fit. The idea of what constitutes a utopia changes over time, and with it, the parody and satire of the allegedly perfect utopias change as well. Paranoia, with its ability to transform and be customised by the people playing it, is perhaps the greatest example of the precariousness of the concept of utopias and, by extension, anti-utopias. As the lead designer WJ MacGuffin argues,
Paranoia has always been about satire, not parody. Parody is making fun of something very specific, which Paranoia attempted with missions parodying other RPGs […] Paranoia works when it mocks, explores, and pokes fun at big, overarching issues like how people reacted to the pandemic or the role of celebrities in society.3
Therefore, one can argue that the customisation of what is being satirised in Paranoia is not simply an optional feature, but the very core element of the TTRPG.
Paranoia Origins: (Some of) The Inspirations
When examining Paranoia, one should also be aware of its original inspirations, such as Orwell’s 1984 and Michael Anderson’s Logan’s Run. While the TTRPG draws inspiration from many novels and movies
3 Comment on r/ParanoiaRPG, October 15 2022. <www.reddit.com/r/ParanoiaRPG/comments/kgtpfz/paranoia_related_academic_es say/>
61

Utopia on the Tabletop
throughout the history, the two works mentioned above share a great deal of similarities with the setting and the mood of Paranoia at its core. Whether it is the totalitarian governments with no regards to personal privacy or the visuals of citizens’ clothes and living environments, it is undeniable that these works provided Paranoia with some of its most crucial aspects. In order to fully understand Paranoia and how it contributes to the anti-utopia genre, one must first take a look at these inspiring works.
No discussion of the inspirations behind Paranoia could fail to mention George Orwell’s 1948 dystopian novel 1984. Exploring the similarities of these two fictional societies, the first thing that catches one’s attention is the parallels between ‘Big Brother’ and The Computer. Just as Big Brother monitors and controls Oceania’s citizens’ every move and thought, The Computer and its many security cameras watch Alpha Complex citizens’ every action and behaviour. Citizens in 1984 are surveilled via telescreens and other mechanisms. With concepts such as individuality and privacy long gone, people in both settings are forced to live to serve, instead of living according to their own values.
Another similarity between 1984 and Paranoia comes from how they deal with the concept of history. In both of these works, history is subject to change according to the whims of the leaders and it is impossible to find any documents of objective history. The concept of an unfixed history is so strict, in fact, that even questioning the validity of history can be perceived as problematic and potentially dangerous. In both cases, the ultimate arbiter of truth is also inaccessible and unaccountable. Big Brother, it is eventually revealed, does not even exist as an individual person. Similarly, the nature and origin of the Friend Computer’s authority is mysterious.
Both 1984 and Paranoia feature themes of deception, informing, and working both for and against the government. There is little to no trust between the characters and the players respectively. This distrust, which is usually more characteristic of social deduction games such as Mafia or The Resistance, makes Paranoia highly distinctive among tabletop roleplaying games.
Lastly, the totalitarian government does not only control what people do, but also what they think and speak. 1984’s ‘Newspeak’ has strong
62

Sert: The Perfect (Anti) Utopia of the Alpha Complex
resonances with the concept of mandatory happiness in Paranoia, where citizens are advised to be happy with whatever means necessary. It is also quite rare to encounter characters speaking their minds freely in fear of being labelled as a traitor. Paranoia also features ‘happy pills,’ reminiscent of dystopian fiction such as Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World and Lois Lowry’s The Giver.
Another great inspiration behind Paranoia is the 1976 movie based on the book by the same name, Logan’s Run. While the movie by Michael Anderson and the book by William F. Nolan and George Clayton Johnson have a handful of differences, Varney’s Paranoia XP lists the movie and the TV show (which first aired in 1977) as the inspiration rather than the book.
When it comes to the similarities between Logan’s Run and Paranoia, the most obvious one is perhaps the visuals of the movie and the implied visuals of the TTRPG. Similar to Paranoia’s clearance-based colour coding, the characters in Logan’s Run also have a wardrobe of monochrome outfits. However, in the latter work, a citizen’s clothes’ colour indicates their age rather than being a merit-based system. While the expendability of the people is a concept shared by both works, in Paranoia, death and rebirth through the clones provide a much less serious mood.
Much like Orwell’s 1984, Logan’s Run also features a totalitarian and seemingly dystopian government. Just as the characters of Paranoia receive their orders from the Friend Computer, Logan gets his orders from a computer which supposedly has access to all the people and the systems of the futuristic society. Furthermore, the concept of disillusionment is quite an important aspect of both Logan’s Run and Paranoia as characters of both settings quickly realise that their supposed utopia might not exactly be what it seems.
However, when it comes to Paranoia and its inspirations, one difference is quite clear. In both 1984 and Logan’s Run, the concepts of love and desire are explored while Paranoia does not feature any such aspect. With 1984’s Winston and Julia, and Logan’s Run’s Logan and Jessica, the audience explores the human nature that demonstrates a need for human connection. However, the lack of not only sexuality but also gender in Paranoia is explained by the hormone suppressants given to the citizens
63

Utopia on the Tabletop
in order to maintain the productivity of the perfect utopia. In a setting that explores human nature and its potential exploitation by The Computer is quite interesting that the game developers decided to omit gender and sexuality completely. However, this approach also provides quite a unique perspective into Alpha Complex as a supposed utopia without some of the core elements of the human experience, namely gender identity and sexual desire.
Anti-Utopia and Critical Dystopia
Paranoia RPG, with its unique set of rules and flexible setting, is a deeply original and highly influential example of an anti-utopia among TTRPGs. As anti-utopias aim to satirise and criticise a certain aspect of a seemingly perfect utopia, Paranoia’s ability to act as a blank slate for a variety of different criticisms makes it the perfect roleplaying game to deploy the concept of anti-utopia. This ability to reinvent anti-utopia again and again, as suits the circumstances, also suggests that Paranoia may offer a kind of critical dystopia, a mode of culture which combines satire with hopefulness. In Tom Moylan’s words, critical dystopia ‘negotiates the conflict between Utopia and Anti-Utopia not in a way that displaces or diffuses that historical contestation but rather invokes Utopia within its own cultural intervention in a time when such oppositional impulses are suppressed or compromised.’4 Whether Paranoia is seen as purely antiutopian, or also carrying some of the more optimistic features of critical dystopia, it is certainly a skilful combination of dystopian inspirations, and offers an experience that can both entertain players and empower them to express themselves creatively.
4 Tom Moylan, Scraps of the Untainted Sky (Boulder: Westview Press, 2000), pp. 191-192.
64

Sert: The Perfect (Anti) Utopia of the Alpha Complex
Works Cited
Sargent, Lyman T. ‘The Three Faces of Utopianism Revisited,’ Utopian Studies Vol. 5, No. 1. Penn State University Press (1994).
MacGuffin, W.J. ‘Paranoia Related Academic Essay (Comment),’ Reddit, 2 August 2021. <www.reddit.com/r/ParanoiaRPG/co mments/kgtpfz/paranoia_related_ac ademic_essay/gghnjdm/>
Moylan, Tom. Scraps of the Untainted Sky. Boulder: Westview Press (2000).
Varney, Allen. Paranoia Troubleshooters. Mongoose Publishing (2009).
—. Paranoia XP. Mongoose Publishing (2004)
65

5. We Will Never Escape Utopia: Gender, Queer, Pragmatic, and Hopeful Utopia in The Treasure at the End of the Dungeon is an Escape From This Dungeon and We Will Never Escape From This
Dungeon
Grace A.T. Worm
The Treasure
In the tabletop roleplaying game The Treasure at the End of the Dungeon is an Escape From This Dungeon and We Will Never Escape From This Dungeon (hereafter The Treasure), players enter the game’s imagined world, a dungeon, knowing that the ‘treasure’ they seek by playing the game is impossible to acquire. The game cannot be won, only perhaps eventually abandoned. It may seem counterintuitive to discuss utopia in a game that announces from the beginning that its systems and structures are permanent, and that any attempt to escape them is ultimately futile. However, it is through this surrender to the process that players learn the lessons of continued hope, perseverance, and community that serve as a foundation for much of contemporary utopian thinking. For these reasons, in this chapter I describe The Treasure as a utopia, while also recognising that it may appear dystopian.
The Treasure can be understood as a process for utopia that, through play, invites the players to build their own counternarratives about what is valuable in the world they enter into, and also work together to change that world, even knowing that practically they will never ‘win’ the game. It is necessary to adapt an in-flux knowledge of utopia through a queer and feminist understanding of a future that will never reconcile the painful past. If the players cannot escape the dungeon, then the focus shifts to
66

Worm: We Will Never Escape Utopia
developing their characters’ relationships through roleplaying. The absurdity of the players’ situation, the cycle of endless dungeon rooms, and the descriptions of characters and rooms, encourage a sense of camaraderie and community. In this sense, the game reflects the structure of utopian hope. For the players, the importance lies in fighting the cycle even when the outcome may never change for, as the game states in the world description, ‘We will never escape this dungeon. We will always try to escape this dungeon.’1 It is possible to work towards utopia while being pragmatic in the knowledge that a perfect future does not exist. In the rest of this chapter, I examine the function of archetypal characters, the utopian dimensions of the players’ roleplaying, and how the game mobilises themes of pragmatism in relation to its feminist and queer utopian ideals.
Utopia is a complex term, and how different pieces of media create and present utopia varies wildly. For this chapter, I approach utopia as a practice stemming from discontent that arises from problems in the present, and exploration of possible futures where these problems are solved or nonexistent. Later in this chapter, I will explore how this vision of utopia shifts into focus through a queer and feminist lens. As suggested by Lucy Sargisson’s Fool’s Gold?: Utopianism in the Twenty-First Century (2012) and Erin McKenna’s The Task of Utopia: A Pragmatist and Feminist Perspective (2001), utopia can present visions of a future in which deeply entrenched social, economic and political problems are resolved or transformed. Sargisson writes that utopia is working towards ‘identifying core problems with today [...] and placing them in a new imaginary context. They thus imagine how the world might be if the core “wrongs” identified by the author were transformed.’2 McKenna explores utopia in relation to the philosophical tradition of pragmatism, and also emphasizes the centrality of hope in interacting with utopian ideals: ‘Utopian visions are
1 Riverhouse Games, The Treasure At The End Of This Dungeon Is An Escape From This Dungeon and We Will Never Escape This Dungeon (Riverhouse Games, 2020), p. 3. 2 Lucy Sargisson, Fool’s Gold?: Utopianism in the Twenty-First Century (Palgrave Macmillan, 2012), p. 13.
67

Utopia on the Tabletop
visions of hope that can challenge us to explore a range of possible human conditions.’3
Utopia is ostensibly where problems are fixed. The creation of a completely separate and carefully integrated fantasy world has often been central to utopian thinking; and not just that it is separate, but that it is totalising. Fredric Jameson describes the movement away from causal utopias as either obsolete due to an inability to solve any and all social disintegration or due to the unparalleled global wealth and technology; however he argues using utopia as an idea to examine politics is still useful.4 Thomas Moylan in Demand the Impossible similarly describes this developing idea of utopia as imperfect and rejects utopia as blueprint, he describes utopia as ‘[f]igures of hope’ through opposition where utopia is ‘produced through the fantasizing powers of the imagination, utopia opposes the affirmative culture maintained by dominant ideology’.5 The completely separate utopian world—with readily available solutions for all the problems it seeks to overcome—has fallen out of favor. As Sargisson writes, ‘Most contemporary utopias tend not to offer visions of complete worlds. And most contemporary utopias avoid depicting a single solution; they decline to offer one complete and finished vision of the good life.’6 In contemporary society, where political, religious, social, and environmental issues have remained at least as divisive as they have been historically, the idea of a perfect utopia that solves all the major conflicts of our current society seems impractical. The Treasure is fundamentally focused on creation and exploration, while providing enough character descriptions to spurn new identity formation without homogenising identity experiences. For example, there is no perfect solution to climate change, and scientific consensus on its causes has not translated to broad political and public agreement, but this does not preclude the struggle for environmental justice. So progress must be made in a more improvisatory, patchwork
3 Erin McKenna, The Task of Utopia: A Pragmatist and Feminist Perspective (Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 2001), p. 1. 4 Fredric Jameson. Politics of Utopia, New Left Review, vol. 25 (2004). 5 Thomas Moylan. Demand the Impossible: Science Fiction and the Utopian Imagination, (Peter Lang, 2014), p. 1 6 Sargisson, Fool’s Gold?, p. 14.
68

Worm: We Will Never Escape Utopia
way. Similarly, contemporary utopias usually don’t try to articulate one single vision of society that is so compelling nobody could refuse it.
This is not to say that utopias are no longer being created and explored in art. Clearly they are, but how they look and what they present has shifted. While utopias may have changed, in that they no longer present perfect solutions, they still offer utopian futures or utopian ways to interact in our own world. McKenna notes that contemporary utopias are far from extinct: ‘Some people argue that in our complex world utopia is dead, or too dangerous to pursue. There is, however, a recent resurgence of interest in the idea.’7 Sargisson notes that while contemporary utopias conduct a more fluid exploration of core issues and their solutions, ‘not all utopianism is about realizing dreams (or progress or harmony) and not all utopianism is driven by perfectionism.’8 Ursula K. Le Guin’s influential 1973 short story, ‘The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas,’ and N.K. Jemisin’s more recent response, ‘The Ones Who Stay and Fight,’ both attempt to contend with these imperfect utopias, and they both reconcile the utopia of a happy community by requiring the necessity of suffering.9 However, they do this in different ways. Le Guin sees arbitrary suffering as necessary to understanding happiness for the citizens of Omelas and focuses on the dilemma of whether or not to accept happiness for many if it depends on the misery of a few. By contrast, Jemisin focuses on the feelings and attitudes of culture that can lead to utopia—respecting fellow lives as equal, while celebrating diversity and uniqueness of the individual—and on fighting to protect these values, “[t]ooth and nail, spear and claw, up close and brutal; no quarter can be given, no parole, no debate.”10 In Jemisin’s utopia Um-Helat, the younger generations are shocked that these differences once formed the basis for treating others as lesser: ‘what shocks the young citizens of Um-Helat is the realization that,
7 McKenna, The Task of Utopia, p. 1. 8 Sargisson, Fool’s Gold?, p. 29. 9 Ursula K. Le Guin ‘The Ones Who Walk Away From Omelas’, (Harper, Kindle Ed., 2017). N.K. Jemisin. ‘The Ones Who Stay and Fight.’ (N.K. Jemisin, LightSpeed Magazine, originally published in ‘How Long ‘Til Black Future Month,’ 2018). 10 Jemisin, N.K. ‘The Ones Who Stay and Fight.’ Le Guin, Ursula K. ‘The Ones Who Walk Away From Omelas.’
69

Utopia on the Tabletop
once, those differences of opinion involved differences in respect. That once, value was ascribed to some people, and not others. That once, humanity was acknowledged for some, and not others.’11 Those who seek forbidden knowledge of hierarchies are executed by a class of pike-wielding “social workers”.12
The utopias of Le Guin and Jemisin are more dynamic than the rigid plans of many eighteenth and nineteenth century utopian thinkers. For example, ‘The Ones Who Walk Away From Omelas’ reflects openly on its own believability, and the narrator confesses to doubts about many of the details: should there be drugs? Should there be cars and helicopters? Likewise, ‘The Ones Who Stay and Fight’ imagines Um-Helat in a state of constant secret struggle against the return of hierarchy. However, while both utopias recognize the imperfections inherent in humanity, both also focus on the separation of suffering from happiness, rather than the knowledge of suffering as part of the process towards change and reconciliation. In Omelas, the knowledge of the child is something that citizens cannot repress or reconcile; they walk away. However, in UmHelat, the social workers seem to brutally protect the citizens from the “poisonous” knowledge of this world. By contrast, The Treasure encompasses all of these notions—the imperfection of utopias, the pain and ignorance inherent in human society, and the painful past (and present) of inequality—but goes a step further, by embracing the process of change as a painful one that can motivate the greatest human compassion and empathy.
The core problem identified by The Treasure is that the players are trapped in a dangerous dungeon, typical of Dungeons & Dragons and many other fantasy games: a labyrinthine environment filled with monsters, traps, and puzzles. The utopia presented is the escape of the dungeon. The game assures the players that escaping is impossible. However, the players are not invited simply to accept this impossibility and camp out in the first room. Instead, they are invited to continue to pursue the impossible. The Treasure consists of two pages of general rules, character sheets with
11 Jemisin, N.K. ‘The Ones Who Stay and Fight.’ 12 Jemisin, N.K. ‘The Ones Who Stay and Fight.’
70

Worm: We Will Never Escape Utopia
abilities/powers for each archetype, and description of five rooms. Characters have to overcome different ‘elements’ in each room before they can progress to the next.13 For example, players choose from a list with options such as ‘a curse’, ‘victory’, ‘a cave-in’ , and ‘the sea’ and answer questions to describe the element picked.14 Of particular interest are elements like ‘realizing your friends are all you have left,’ ‘cherishing what you have in the face of destruction’, ‘a breathless hug after escaping’, and ‘plucky optimism that this time things will be different’ that have the players spend the entire room roleplaying purely emotional and metatextual.15 There are also questions in each room that encourage players to interact with the room differently each time they enter.16 How the players do this, while prompted by questions associated with each room, is ultimately up to the players’ collective play and imagination. The rooms repeat endlessly and change each time the group enters, and death is a central part of the game mechanics. In these respects, The Treasure also reflects the influence of the ‘roguelike’ and ‘roguelite’ genres of video games, including titles such as Nethack and Hades, which place emphasis on procedurally generated dungeons.
The premise of the game may lend itself to comedy, but the tone of the game writing is sincere and heartfelt (although it is also playful at times). It asks sincerity and attentiveness from its players: ‘we crawl this dungeon with friends who we care for, and we ask first before approaching treacherous spaces.’17 The game is not a dystopia or anti-utopia; it is not focused on dissatisfaction with the present, or on extrapolating more extreme forms of contemporary social issues. It does not ‘articulate fears and sketch worlds that people fear might arrive’ but rather it is founded on idealism and hope.18 As a player, the game asks you to create and
13 Riverhouse Games, The Treasure At The End Of This Dungeon Is An Escape From This Dungeon and We Will Never Escape From This Dungeon (Riverhouse Games, 2020), pp. 6-10. 14 Riverhouse Games, The Treasure, pp. 6-10. 15 Ibid. 16 Ibid. 17 Riverhouse Games, The Treasure, p. 4. 18 Sargisson, Fool’s Gold?, p. 9.
71

Utopia on the Tabletop
inhabit a character who desperately hopes and seeks an escape while knowing that it is impossible—how does one create motivation for that character? Why don’t all the characters give up and sit in the first room they encounter in the dungeon, never to move again? Because the game asks for hope and because it drops the players into the middle of the cycle and not at the beginning. They are told that they have been trying to escape the dungeon, that they will always try to escape this dungeon, that they have died many times trying to escape this dungeon, and that they will die many more times trying to escape the dungeon. Certain people in society have always been trying to improve the future: this is the history of human existence, and it is a history of fighting seemingly insurmountable challenges: death, hunger, disease, religious oppression or persecution, racism, sexism, class, environmental destruction, pollution, the unwanted impacts of technology, etc. Particularly articulated through the growing awareness of the current climate emergency, some people sit in the first room, refusing to go any further because the solution is impossible. They fail to answer the question, what is the point of effort if the end remains broadly the same? Others, and perhaps especially those who explore utopia through playing The Treasure, understand that while the human journey may repeat endlessly on the same issues, seemingly making no progress, society may have crossed a point of no return in global climate catastrophe, then utopia is in the struggle rather than the result. The Treasure perfectly encapsulates this hope, this perseverance despite immovable obstacles.
Exploring Identities
My knowledge of the game comes from three main sources: my experience of studying the rules, my experience of playing the game, and my experience of watching others play (in an online recording). As Nicholas J. Mizer writes in Tabletop Role-Playing Games and the Experience of Imagined Worlds, ‘Experience is not some mysterious substance that stands in opposition to the real, objective world of things; experience encompasses both the objective and the subjective [...] By definition,
72

Worm: We Will Never Escape Utopia
therefore, experience is all we can ever know because it encompasses both the knowledge and the thing known.’19 This emphasis on lived experience is not in opposition to the imaginary or fantastical, but rather includes it. Fantasy TTRPGs also offer both wonder at fantasy conventions, magic, fluid physics, monstrous creatures, etc., and yet can also reveal things about the real world that more ‘realistic’ portrayals tend to hide. As Sarah Lynne Bowman argues in The Functions of Role-Playing Games, by allowing players to see things that are not real, fantasy allows players to think more widely about what is truly possible, and so rework their experiences of the real world: ‘The ability to take up a fantastic viewpoint can [...] aid us in putting things in better perspective; what we “recover” in fantasy is actually a clearer sight than we normally employ in viewing the world because it is a less narrow sight.’20 While The Treasure has fantasy elements nonexistent in our own world, the way the rules are written, the interactions between players as they roleplay, and ultimately the futile effort for change all echo our own world and allow the players to play, experience, and interact with the feelings of hope, resilience, and change.
While each play of The Treasure may be different depending on the worlds players create, some aspects of the game remain stable: the utopian elements described here, the motivation for the game, and the tone set by the rules, all remain consistent throughout games. TTRPGs offer the experience of a blend of realities that players use to create their own cohesive and unique interaction with the game: Mizer describes the experience as simultaneously multitude and unified, ‘as we synthesize disparate details into a cohesive experience, we inhabit not a singly unified world but instead a limitless number of worlds, each with their own unique characteristics. We access this multiplicity of worlds through attention or inattention to various aspects of our experience.’21 The attention The Treasure asks of its players is to focus on the cyclical nature of the gaming
19 Mizer, Tabletop Role-Playing, p. 5. 20 Sarah Lynne Bowman, The Functions of Role-Playing Games: How Participants Create Community, Solve Problems and Explore Identity (Shutterstock, McFarland & Company, 2010), p. 57. 21 Mizer, Tabletop Role-Playing, p. 7.
73

Utopia on the Tabletop
experience and on their own interactions with others—both as their characters reacting to the world and as themselves in creating the world. The characters/selves are purposefully vague and rely on archetypal representations, The Mage, The Thief, The Healer, or The Muscle, to both encourage players to create their own version of the character and to further emphasize the communal nature of the game. The selves are also ever-changing: for example The Healer has to give up or change their sacred oaths in order to heal.22 The selves have always travelled the dungeon as these archetypes, even as their look, powers, personalities, and relationships have changed, and have been trying to escape the dungeon long before the players inhabit them. And the four characters must journey together, and the use of their powers often relies on the rest of the group.
As in most TTRPGs, players are encouraged to experiment with an identity beyond their own, to play at being someone different: ‘role-playing offers participants a safe space to enact alternate personas through a process known as identity alteration.’23 TTRPGs also provide a way for these personas to interact, increasing their substance and complexity, and participating in a shared world: ‘Role-playing is an interactive process of defining and re-defining the state, properties and contents of an imaginary game world.’24 The formation of characters and world encourages the players to navigate performances of identity and to play with their own selfimages. In The Treasure, the vagueness of the characters and of the world, as described in the official game rules, further encourages players to playfully explore, subvert, and reject stereotypes, and gives the players both autonomy over the game and yet the feeling that they are not unique nor are their adventures. The opening rules and world formation use ‘we’ throughout, further emphasizing the cooperative nature and universal experience of the game. The players are creators and characters; the game is a game and real. This juxtaposition is crucial in The Treasure as it asks its players to be sincere in their roleplaying but also to recognize that what
22 Riverhouse Games, The Treasure, p. 14. 23 Bowman, The Functions of Role-Playing Games, p. 1. 24 Mizer, Tabletop Role-Playing, p. 47.
74

Worm: We Will Never Escape Utopia
identity the players create is less important than the actual creation of the identity. The Treasure balances unique identity formation, identity interaction between player and character, and identity interaction through world-setting roleplaying and game formation. The strongly cooperative nature of the game is also a reminder of the players’ shared predicament— while they are constantly helping one another, none of them ever has the power to give them what they most crave, escape from the dungeon. At the same time, in confronting their powerlessness to overcome the rules that govern this world, players can also discover their power to remake their own identities.
The image of a dungeon is classic to TTRPGs, calling to mind adventurers trapped in dark and dangerous places far below the warmth of the sun, society, greenery, or free movement. Dungeons are full of traps and are often dank, stifling, and dark—places people generally avoid— although they can occasionally also be the scene of sublime marvels and beauty. The most famous tabletop roleplaying game, of course, closely deals with dungeons—it’s in the name. Could The Treasure then be read as an answer to the limitations of Dungeons & Dragons, including the constant attempts to break away from its often sexist and racist use of characterizations and archetypes?25 Helen Young notes that racial discourse in D&D is ‘deployed through core rulebooks and supplements’ which creates ‘an inherent dichotomy [between GM and players] with less need for active participation in world-building and narrative creation’.26 This power dynamic and the reliance on pre-written races, leaves little creative space for imagining alternatives. And given the huge influence and popularity of D&D, might The Treasure also be seen as an attempt to critique and reimagine TTRPGs more broadly? The Treasure also follows a looser structure than D&D since there is no complicated fighting mechanics or levelling system, and no rolling whatsoever. Significantly,
25 Antero Garcia, ‘Privilege, Power, and Dungeons & Dragons: How Systems Shape Racial and Gender Identities in Tabletop Role-Playing Games, Mind, Culture, and Activity’ (Routledge, 2017), p. 240. 26Helen Young. Race and Popular Fantasy Literature: Habits of Whiteness (Taylor & Francis Group, 2015), p. 91.
75

Utopia on the Tabletop
there is also no Dungeon Master: this ensures that The Treasure will develop completely through cooperative play, as the player who opens the door to a room (the players all take turns opening doors) decides on the reality of the room. The game’s instructions include the equalizing line ‘none of us owns the dungeon and we all own the dungeon.’27 This echoes our current ownership of the global climate crisis and violent political movements of the 21st century: we are all at fault and yet no one individual is at fault alone. We all have a responsibility in the solution, even if we all have varying degrees of culpability in the current situations because climate change catastrophe affects all humans currently alive. And just as with the current climate crisis, there may be no way to return to before but there is still possible positive change.
Critical work on the cooperative nature of TTRPGs has often focused on benefits such as social interaction, improved mental health, and education. While these approaches are interesting, they risk missing the stranger and more potentially disruptive aspects of TTRPG cooperation. Cooperating in the medium of a TTRPG can give rise to a great variety of social dynamics, some of which may be elusive to describe or to judge. They may not always resemble what we would normally call ‘cooperation’ in other contexts. ‘Role-playing—and performance in general—also entails a reconfiguration of social roles. The player is stripped of previous rank in the external world and given equal status to fellow players.’28 This is especially true of games like The Treasure, where there is no GM, and where the absence of a GM figure occasionally becomes quite conspicuous as players cooperate to shape the world that they inhabit. They can find it difficult, at times, to negotiate boundaries. For instance, ‘The Battle Room’ in The Treasure always involves a creature of some sort wanting to do deadly harm to the players. For a player, it can be uncomfortable to harm another player through the monster, without the overriding authority of being GM. In imposing shared responsibility for storytelling, The Treasure mirrors practices of improvisational theatre, where actors must stay
27 Riverhouse Games, The Treasure, p. 4. 28 Bowman, The Functions of Role-Playing Games, p. 51.
76

Worm: We Will Never Escape Utopia
closely attuned to the group’s dynamic and create a cohesive narrative without overshadowing other group members.
It also mirrors anarchist practices of consensus decision-making, Roleplaying in The Treasure is an equalizer, and despite the previous experience of players entering the game, they all have to accept their new roles within the game structure and to equally recognize that power in the other players. This experience of negotiation further serves to equalize the players within the world, and to explore alternate democratic imaginaries. There is no escaping from the dungeon, so there is no escaping from conflicts that arise between characters, or from the tensions between the individual and the collective. Similarly, in our 21st century struggles for equality, diversity, and sustainability. communities may be fractured politically and unable to find consensus for dealing with larger social issues, yet we are connected by the world that we share, the world that we will never escape. At least in The Treasure, all players should be equally focused on the same mission, which is to escape the dungeon. Players’ characters may develop additional motivations, especially when confronted with the repetition of rooms and disappointed hopes. The Healer, for instance, is guided by a changing Oath. Furthermore, their healing mechanic asks other players to reveal “what they cherish about the world,” which may also enrich the universe beyond the sole objective of escaping the dungeon. Then there is the Thief, who presumably wants to steal, perhaps even steal from their companions; the Thief player is invited to deceive the other players by pretending to follow “horrendously complicated” rules, which do not really exist. So despite the united purpose, players often have to give up autonomy to other players at various points in order to progress the game. The game then is never static, but in a constant state of flux, with power sometimes being concentrated in the hands of a particular player, and sometimes more evenly distributed.
The fantastic, the mundane, the collective, and the individual, all form the experience of the game. Mizer has explored the power of roleplaying to bring together apparently contradictory states, especially past, present and future: ‘the nostalgic draw of gaming goes deeper than childhood memories’, and through skilled rituals of playful enchantment, players may come to term with the “disenchanting and disempowering wounds of
77

Utopia on the Tabletop
modernity’’29 Understanding The Treasure as these unique and separate elements that blend together through play into one ‘experience’ is the core of experiencing utopia through this game. The game does not ask its players to passively view a perfected vision of utopia, in which all contradictions are resolved. Rather, the roleplaying and collective storytelling and worldbuilding all give the players agency over their own game, and forces them to understand through experience how this collection of juxtapositions can coexist: past, present; fantastic, mundane; collective, individual; entrapment and escape; utopia and dystopia. The players are given the autonomy to create the dungeon, to deconstruct but not destroy it, and to yearn to escape without the power to do so, even if they still wield power over the larger environment; just as we as individuals in the world are given the agency to create our own unique experience and identity that ultimately has to follow certain rules of existence.
Intriguingly, the agency of play also invites the players to come up with their own justification and rationalization for why they cannot escape the dungeon. It is one thing to be told that you cannot escape, and another to be in control of the world, fight to escape it, but ultimately be unable to by your own design. The players in The Treasure surrender themselves willingly to the process and find solace, not in gaining victories, but in cooperative gameplay and the story they create together, both as individuals and as a collective. In one of my own plays of this game, players ultimately gave up our own identities, arguing that without the selves to be endlessly trapped in the dungeon, the dungeon could not endlessly trap us. Another play-through with the same people saw players finally returning to the beginning of their journey, recapturing an imagined or shared history, full again of hope and faith in our escape from the dungeon. Each player and game will ultimately have to find their own justification for the continuation of the cycle, limited by the game’s instructions but also motivated by their own characterizations and journey. This mirrors our own society, where people with all their unique motivations and identities ultimately have to work cooperatively to reconcile the
29 Mizer, Tabletop Role-Playing, p. 60.
78

Worm: We Will Never Escape Utopia
impossibility of changing the human condition with the necessity of radical hope.
Relational Autonomy
Utopias are not always happy, as McKenna writes—utopias as visions of the future ‘have been used both to inspire and warn.’30 The Treasure ultimately does both. Reading The Treasure through a feminist lens helps to further identify the kind of utopia presented by the game. The feminism of The Treasure does not mean it ignores other diverse political issues. As with many feminist utopias, it serves ‘to illustrate one of the main functions of utopias’ is ‘engagement in contemporary debates.’ This reading relies on aspects I identified earlier in this chapter: the equalizing nature of the roleplaying, the ambiguous and genderless archetypes, the way the archetypes depend on each other, and the cooperative worldbuilding, all mean that autonomy is relational, not individualistic. In the fundamentally unjust world of The Treasure, players have little choice but to embrace an ethic of care, and make their own world out of their relationships.31
The Treasure is not a passive experience, and the game wouldn’t be very fun without a commitment to the roleplaying, and so this forces the players to adopt the ideals of the game and to find a way through the story to reconcile and reevaluate their goals. The game’s feminist emphasis on relationality does not mean it is without struggle or conflict. Just the opposite. The future utopias imagined, with a critical understanding of gender inequality, can become part of a process of working towards gender liberation. Such utopias need not wish away the historical and current difficulties that plague the movement, but can become ways of understanding those very difficulties. The desire for change is inherent in feminism, a movement that has often needed to reflect critically on itself, and reimagine itself in more inclusive ways. Likewise, the players of Treasure must accept evolution and revelation with new iteration, or else
30 McKenna, The Task of Utopia, p. 1. 31 Sargisson, Fool’s Gold?, p. 55.
79

Utopia on the Tabletop
stagnate within the broken cages they sought to deconstruct. Despite condemning the players to never escape the dungeon, the rules in The Treasure repeatedly rely on the imagery of breaking free, of breaking oppressive cages. Sargisson argues that when utopias ‘fail’ to imagine radical difference, far from being a failure of utopianism, it ‘indicates the need for utopian thinking, which is an on-going struggle of political discontent, desire, failure. This face of utopianism is about dissatisfaction, desire, struggle, failure and then picking up oneself to struggle some more’.32 Sargisson’s description echoes the feeling of playing The Treasure, where gameplay moves endlessly through the same rooms, where characters die and are immediately reborn as the same archetype, where heroic deeds bring them no closer to their final goal. This game is about the struggle and then struggling on again until the players agree to give up on struggling and end the game. It’s about exploring your character, finding freedom within constraints, and about what you do with the knowledge you gain from the experience. Players as creators are made to take responsibility for the suffering within the game, as they collectively tell a story. McKenna argues that feminist utopias are ‘visions of what could be possible, as an experimental process—an experimental coping with conflict and difficulties’ and that beyond seeking perfection, ‘the process model of utopia seeks to create and sustain people willing to take on responsibility and participate in directing their present toward a better, more desirable future.’33 This is the experience of playing The Treasure, a process of play that encourages players to act together to make an enjoyable game experience and to journey together towards the possibility of a better future. As Allison Weir writes, ‘the struggle to resolve conflicts through an openness to difference is essential to the practice of change and the generation of new meaning. It is impossible to understand the developments in the self-understanding of feminists, and the feminist movement, without acknowledging the role played by individual and collective struggles to understand differences and make sense of and
32 Sargisson, Fool’s Gold?, p. 78. 33 McKenna, The Task of Utopia, p. 3.
80

Worm: We Will Never Escape Utopia
resolve conflicts’.34 In The Treasure, the fact that the players cannot reach their goal only emphasizes the importance of utopia as the experience of relational autonomy, working through tensions and conflicts, making progress even if the progress is often cyclical, and bearing responsibility for the ending, even though its course was set beforehand by others.35
Queerness
Riverhouse Games, the creator behind The Treasure, describes the company as ‘weird queer tabletop games’, explicitly inviting interpretation of The Treasure as a queer game.36 This queerness can be seen in at least two ways. First, the characters are written as genderless figures, and the rules support and encourage ambiguity and/or fluidity of gender identity. The game as written mentions no genders. The ‘selves’ are assembled by a lists of options that are not conspicuously gendered: players circle a ‘look’ from a list of options like ‘Mischievous & Mercurial,’ ‘Leather & Lace,’ or ‘Hale & Hallowed,’ circle a specialty / weapon / spell / oath, and circle a power source.37 Directions are addressed to the player in the second person, and the players are encouraged through storytelling to develop their characters, to perform different genders, or as several of the players I played with, to remain genderless throughout the game. The experience of playing The Treasure does not conform to mainstream norms of gender or sexual identity because roles that would be seen as typically masculine, The Muscle for example, is genderless and only has a gender when a player playing the game actively makes them express one. The essential performance of roleplaying is queer because it asks a person to create an identity not their own, often one, as in the case of the games I played, that doesn’t align with the player’s gender or sexual identity. Crucially, however, the game also does not ignore social issues or homogenize
34 Allison Weir, ‘Toward a Model of Self-Identity: Habermas and Kristeva’ in Feminists Read Habermas, p. 266. 35 Sargisson, Fool’s Gold?, p. 75. 36 Go Jess, The Treasure. 37 Riverhouse Games, The Treasure, p. 11-14.
81

Utopia on the Tabletop
identity exploration, but rather provokes players to share their unique experiences through questions rather than minute character descriptions.
Second, more broadly, The Treasure explores queerness through ‘transgressive forms of play’ that abandon winning and losing and focuses on the repetition of actions, rooms, characters, and motivation.38 Queerness, as defined by Bonnie Ruberg in Video Games Have Always Been Queer, ‘serves as an umbrella term for people and experiences that do not conform to mainstream norms of gender and sexuality’, and ultimately may be a starting point for questioning any norms whatsoever.39 Ruberg connects this sense of queerness with the experiences that games offer of ‘failing’ and ‘dying’, experiences that often mingle frustration and pleasure, oblivion and enlightenment. José Esteban Muñoz writes in Cruising Utopia: The Then and There of Futurity that ‘queerness is utopian, and there is something queer about the utopian’ due to the desire to live in a heteronormative society and yet wish for and envision a future that is tolerant and equal.40 The Treasure lives in the present of the unchangeable, and yet asks its players to envision a future where they can escape. Just as queerness, for Muñoz, “must be viewed as being visible only in the horizon,” escape from the dungeon is visible only in the horizon. One room of the dungeon is the full title of the game, ‘THE TREASURE AT THE END OF THIS DUNGEON IS AN ESCAPE FROM THIS DUNGEON AND WE WILL NEVER ESCAPE FROM THIS DUNGEON’, and tells players to choose an element that makes them believe they could escape the dungeon, while asking them to question why they ever thought they could leave the dungeon.41 Every time the selves enter the room, there is a different element to the room, a tangible thing that generates a specific sense of grounded hope in that moment. The play in this room ultimately ends by asking players how they feel in realizing that they are back at the start of their journey with the final message being that though they never escape,
38 Bonnie Ruberg, Video Games Have Always Been Queer (New York University, 2019), p. 14. 39 Ruberg, Video Games Have Always Been Queer (2019), p. 14. 40 José Esteban Muñoz, Cruising Utopia: The Then and There of Queer Futurity (New York University, 2019), p. 52. 41 Riverhouse Games, The Treasure, p. 10.
82

Worm: We Will Never Escape Utopia
they will relive eternally the hope of escaping.42 Muñoz, who famously asserts that “[w]e have never been queer,” nonetheless recognizes queerness in hoping for a better future while overcome with despair and suffering in the present; he writes that ‘ultimately, we must insist on a queer futurity because the present is so poisonous and insolvent.’43 A queer utopia recognizes the eternal struggle and burdens of the past and hopes for a better future despite the present.
The dungeon in The Treasure is impassive and genderless, but as the players enter and create the space, they call on their own experiences of identity, where gender and sexual orientation are often central to a person’s creation of identity in society. The importance of entering this queer space through TTRPGs is one of embodiment and performance in relinquishing typical game structures and enjoying the experience of roleplaying with other humans. Even the character developments, which players make throughout The Treasure when asked introspective questions and when forced to confront elements of the rooms, are less important than the overall experience of the world of The Treasure, the experience of repetition and hope. Understanding this game as a lived experience of another world superimposed over our own is central to embodying the message of The Treasure since, to again quote Mizer, ‘one major result of this approach has been an increasing sense that one of the most important things going on in TRPGs is not character development or plot progression but the experience of imagined worlds themselves.’44 All games ask players to create identity, often in relation to other players and characters, and to embody these characters. Ruberg sees this connection as a common longing for change and resistance to inherent power structures: ‘queerness and video games share a common ethos: the longing to imagine alternative ways of being and to make space within structures of power for resistance through play.’45 The process of cooperative play in TTRGPs is central to
42 Riverhouse Games, The Treasure, p. 10. 43 Muñoz, Cruising Utopia, p.1, p.56. 44 Nicholas J. Mizer, Tabletop Role-Playing Games and Experience of Imagined Worlds (Palgrave Games in Context, Springer Nature Switzerland AG, 2019), p. 5. 45 Ruberg, Video Games, p. 1.
83

Utopia on the Tabletop
queerness through engaging with alternate power structures, particularly negotiating consensus among players on an equal footing. Playing The Treasure is not a straightforward experience of utopia; it is muddled, messy, confusing, violent, humorous, fun, sad, frustrating, and hopeful. All these experiences while playing represent a far more accurate journey to future progress, one that recognizes the inherent jumble of personal experience. This experience, too, is queer, for progress is not linear nor complete; in fact, ‘these experiences are often far messier, more winding, and ultimately richer than tales of straight movement from oppression to acceptance would suggest.’46 The experience of playing The Treasure—of hoping despite evidence to the contrary and of accepting the cycle of progress is not a linear experience—matches contemporary ideas of progress more closely than a traditional utopia with all the answers to current issues presented by the author as complete or coherent.
Pragmatism
There are two definitions of pragmatism that help inform this utopian reading of the game. Pragmatism in a philosophical sense focuses on words and thoughts as methods for problem solving and action rather than mirroring our own reality. Certainly, The Treasure can be understood in this context as a utopia of tools rather than direct representations of answers to our reality. When McKenna describes this utopia of winding, messy progress, she emphasises the importance of self-reflection. She writes, ‘Envisioning the future from a pragmatist and feminist perspective results in what I call the process model of utopia. In the process model, it becomes important for us to critically examine the goals we choose to pursue because what we choose to pursue now defines what we will be able to pursue in the future.’47 The Treasure invites players to critically examine their goals. Who are we, and who are we becoming? Why are we trying to escape this dungeon if we can never escape this dungeon? What would it mean to escape the dungeon? What might we find within the
46 Ruberg, Video Games, p. 2. 47 McKenna, The Task of Utopia, p. 3.
84

Worm: We Will Never Escape Utopia
dungeon, and what kind of life might we build here? Can we change the dungeon? Might there be a way to leave the dungeon without ‘escaping’ it? In this way, The Treasure also invites players to continually recreate motivations for pursuing a better future, despite their knowledge that the future that they are chasing will be forever elusive. I also see the play of this game as direct pragmatism, as a recognition of the failures of our reality while simultaneously enacting an imagined representation of method and process. Or in other words, a fantasy landscape that is not limited by reality but through artistic manipulation, explores the philosophical process of utopia. As I wrote this chapter, and as I played and watched others play The Treasure, I could not stay away from themes of global climate disaster. The themes of hope, fighting for progress, and cooperation are particularly poignant in this context. We, the people alive right now, have inherited a dying planet with the knowledge that political ambivalence and outright lies are impeding progress. And yet, there is still much hope in the face of certain catastrophe and continued perseverance from dedicated individuals to combat climate change. The game examines shared histories and personal responsibility, emphasizing the importance of progress for alternative ‘selves’ rather than as an immediate answer to problems. As a player, I found myself asking through my character, ‘How do we fight for progress when the battle is impossible? How do we play when we can’t win?’ We may not be the selves that survive the coming global change, but we can push forward in the hope that something will endure in the future, if not this self or this individual. The game encourages players to embrace the cyclical nature of the imagined world, with an option for ending the game by realizing they are back at the start of the game. It relies on inherited stories of opposition to expand utopian thinking rather than as a limiting history of failures. This is not about impressing on the players that nothing they do matters. The players’ actions do matter: they are real in the lived experience of the game and in the social bonds made between players. The fact that they have struggled endlessly to find the treasure at the end of the dungeon only validates the importance in the process, that the treasure is worth finding. Struggling for utopia as a human is about embracing the struggle itself, about embracing the histories of those who have struggled before, and about
85

Utopia on the Tabletop
finding meaning as an individual in this shared experience. The utopia presented in The Treasure asks for critical self-understanding and infinite hope. It asks the players to find meaning in the process of seeking change.
This is also a very practical way of living. Pragmatism and utopianism are sometimes seen as polar opposites. Muñoz argues against utopia as pragmatic in the sense that complex struggles should not be condensed for the sake of utopia, but probably agrees with McKenna’s arguments for pragmatism as instruments rather than reality. Muñoz writes that ‘pragmatic gay politics present themselves as rational and ultimately more doable.’48 Despite some tension between the two concepts of pragmatism and its effect on process utopia, these definitions ultimately complement each other. I argue that pragmatism and utopianism are even more closely aligned than this in The Treasure. As a philosophical tradition, pragmatism includes the belief that ‘progress is to be found in the ongoing activity of people seeking meaning in a changing world’ (6). This is something it shares with process utopianism. We should not allow our lives to be ruled by abstract paradoxes that reason seemingly cannot solve, such as the endless striving to escape the inescapable. Instead, we should reflect on our practical circumstances, the things we need and care about right now: ‘we participate in and direct experimentation in light of our own purposes and goals’ (87). At the same time, pragmatism in this sense doesn’t mean simply living in the moment and abandoning all possibility of progress and growth, as individuals and as a community. Rather, the pragmatism of the utopia presented in The Treasure is the knowledge that while each individual’s journey may be unique, the methods and the overall shape of the change may not be. In particular, it is important that the hope that we nourish in this way is democratic in nature, so that it can “push us to accept our interrelatedness and plurality, which in turn pushes us to enlarge our visions—to look further beyond ourselves”.49 This is ensured by the cooperative nature of The Treasure. As well as a plurality of selves, The Treasure celebrates a plurality of futures. The singular happy ending of ‘escape from dungeon’ is impossible. As McKenna writes: ‘if one can get
48 Muñoz, Cruising Utopia, p. 59. 49 McKenna, The Task of Utopia, p. 100.
86

Worm: We Will Never Escape Utopia
beyond trying to achieve final perfect end-states and accept that there are instead multiple possible futures-in-process, one has taken the first step to understanding the responsibility each of us has for the future by deciding how to live our lives in the present.’50
Conclusions
Utopia is above all practical. Understanding utopia as an ongoing democratic experiment, within an unreasonable world, is what allows utopia to remain alive despite its imperfections: ‘pragmatism can keep utopia alive without falling back on the end-state model of utopia. Utopia can become an ongoing task rather than a resting place.’51 Believing in utopia is not impractical, and does not mean the abandonment of reason, knowledge, or common ground. It does not erase the past. It embraces and integrates past, present and future through recognition and exploration: ‘both pragmatism and utopianism encourage people to think about the future as a guide to understanding the past and forming the present.’52 Rigid, ‘perfect’ utopian worlds leave no space for real people to seek answers to issues and can court disastrous consequences of apathy, inaction, and futility. This game as a TTRPG constantly redefines identity, world, politics, emotion, and community and serves as a crucial act of navigating self and self-image.
As McKenna writes, visions ‘that seek specific ends, and encourage people to maintain a passive faith that the future will be better, run the risk of unleashing on the world, in an organized and devastating manner, genocide, nuclear desecration, sophisticated genetic engineering, and intentionally directed psychological manipulation.’53 Action is necessary, it is not enough to acknowledge futility or to understand solutions practically, hope and perseverance are needed to fight for a future, to seek change when it is difficult. Utopias are ideals, as possible futures despite
50 McKenna, The Task of Utopia, p. 147. 51 McKenna, The Task of Utopia, p. 3. 52 McKenna, The Task of Utopia, p. 5. 53 McKenna, The Task of Utopia, p. 1.
87

Utopia on the Tabletop
a comprehensive knowledge of the present, and this vision of the future, without the specific answer to the core issues, is inspiring as a fluctuating goal much nearer to our own understanding of social progress and cycles:
Utopia is an ideal, something that should mobilize us, push us forward. Utopia is not prescriptive; it renders potential blueprints of a world not quite here, a horizon of possibility, not a fixed schema. It is productive to think about utopia as flux, a temporal disorganization, as a moment when the here and the now transcended by a then and a there that could be and indeed should be.54
The Treasure is pragmatic; it provides a blueprint for experiencing hope and perseverance through cooperative play in order to accept the cycle of hope and dismay and yet work to somehow break the cycle. And the players must take responsibility for the world they inhabit while acknowledging a past riddled with the errors of others, must work together, and must find worth in the process. We have inherited the journey towards utopia, and yet we are still individuals fighting for it. Perhaps The Treasure can seem hopeless or unsatisfactory at first glance, but the experience of play within the world of the dungeon is the opposite. If we end at the beginning, we receive the gift of all the hope we possessed at the start of the journey, we surrender to the process, we accept knowledge, and we work as a community for better change despite the odds. Our world continues to prove that progress is not linear, that change is not always good, that some tragedies are irreversible, that many problems cannot be solved by the individual, but also that human hope, experience, and community are infinite. We may not find the treasure in our lifetime, we as humans may never find the treasure, the utopia, the escape from generations of pain, but we will never give up hope in the process of progress.
54 Muñoz, Cruising Utopia, p. 127.
88

Worm: We Will Never Escape Utopia
Works Cited

Bowman, Sarah Lynne. The Functions of Role-Playing Games: How Participants Create Community, Solve Problems and Explore Identity. Shutterstock, McFarland & Company (2010).
Jameson, Fredric. ‘Politics of Utopia.’ New Left Review, vol. 25 (2004).
Jemisin, N.K. ‘The Ones Who Stay and Fight.’ LightSpeed Magazine, No 116 (January 2020). <www.lightspeedmagazine.com/fictio n/the-ones-who-stay-and-fight/>. Originally published in How Long Til Black Future Month (2018).
Garcia, Antero, ‘Privilege, Power, and Dungeons & Dragons: How Systems Shape Racial and Gender Identities in Tabletop Role-Playing Games,’ Mind, Culture, Activity, Vol. 23, No. 3 (2017). <doi.org/10.1080/10749039.2017.1 293691>.
Go Jess, ‘The Treasure At The End Of This Dungeon Is An Escape From This Dungeon’, YouTube, 31 Mar 2020. <www.youtube.com/watch?v=3ccOY ViIllY>.
Le Guin, Ursula K. ‘The Ones Who Walk Away From Omelas’, Harper. Kindle Ed. (2017).

McKenna, Erin. The Task of Utopia: A Pragmatist and Feminist Perspective. Rowman & Littlefield (2001).
Mizer, Nicholas J. Tabletop RolePlaying Games and Experience of Imagined Worlds. Palgrave Games in Context, Springer Nature Switzerland AG (2019).
Moylan, Thomas. Demand the Impossible: Science Fiction and the Utopian Imagination. Peter Lang (2014).
Muñoz, José Esteban. Cruising Utopia: The Then and There of Queer Futurity. New York University (2019).
Riverhouse Games, ‘Riverhouse Games Home’, 2021. <riverhousegames.com>.
Riverhouse Games, The Treasure at the End of this Dungeon is an Escape from this Dungeon And We Will Never Escape From This Dungeon (2020).
Ruberg, Bonnie. Video Games Have Always Been Queer. New York University (2019).
Sargisson, Lucy. Fool’s Gold?: Utopianism in the Twenty-First Century. Palgrave Macmillan (2012).

89

6. Finding Utopia in the Failures and Lost Languages of Dialect
Ben Platt
‘It seems that the utopian imagination is trapped, like capitalism and industrialism and the human population, in a one-way future consisting only of growth. All I’m trying to do is figure out how to put a pig on the tracks.’
— Ursula K. Le Guin1
What happens when we combine TTRPGs, an artistic medium that often depends on the productive forces of failure, with utopianism, a ‘philosophy of hope’2 that expresses the ‘desire for a better way of being’3 but which has been undermined by its ties to the social and political failures of the 20th century?
TTRPGs often build their mechanical foundations on the bedrock tension between success and failure through action-resolution systems that some game studies scholars identify as one of ‘three key design areas [...] relevant for all types of RPGs.’4 Failure, for many players, makes the eventual successes that emerge through these improvisational stories all the sweeter. As Sarah Lynne Bowman remarks, ‘even players who enjoy various types of games for entertainment… locate their pleasure as rooted
1 Ursula K. Le Guin, ‘A Non-Euclidean View of California as a Cold Place to Be,’ in The Yale Review, Volume LXXII, No. 2 (January 1983). 2 Lyman Tower Sargent, Utopianism: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), p. 30. 3 Ruth Levitas, ‘For Utopia: The (Limits of the) Utopian Function in Late Capitalist Society,’ Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy, 3.2–3 (2000), p. 27. 4 Staffan Björk and José Pablo Zagal, ‘Game Design and Role-Playing Games,’ in Role-Playing Game Studies: Transmedia Foundations, by José Pablo Zagal and Sebastian Deterding (New York, NY: Routledge, 2018), p. 327.
90

Platt: Finding Utopia in the Failures and Lost Languages of Dialect
in the mental challenges necessary for success and the competitive gratification inherent to outwitting an opponent.’5
Utopianism, on the other hand, seems to have been undermined in the popular imagination due to its association with failure. In our current socio-political climate, ‘to call a political ideology or project “utopian” in this context was not only to signal that it was unrealistic or unrealizable,’ but also that utopianism as a whole is ‘irresponsibly and actively dangerous, an effort to exert political control over whole societies, freeze history, deny social complexity, and treat human beings as so much raw material for the fulfilment of grand philosophical visions.’6 These visions were more often than not ‘the emanation of a single, individual will, a fantasy of total control.’7 Remnants of a utopian desire persist, but have to contend with the bleak socio-political landscapes where they are often drowned out by the ‘empty din of globalized neoliberal capitalism’ and the general consensus within ‘mature capitalist liberal democracies’ that the ‘prospect of gradual progress under consensual, relatively depoliticized, liberal or social-democratic governance’ is the best path forward.8 Because of its perceived failures, utopianism as a method of representing and bringing about concrete ‘replacement ideologies’9 and ‘full-fledged
5 Sarah Lynne Bowman, The Functions of Role-Playing Games: How Participants Create Community, Solve Problems and Explore Identity (Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland, 2010), p. 83; Mary T. Nguyen, ‘Mind Games: With No Aversions to Diversions, Columbia’s Adult Gamers Come Together for Social Fun and Mental Challenges,’ Columbia Daily Tribune (Columbia, Missouri, 9 March 2007); Bill MacKenty, ‘All Play and No Work: Computer Games Are Invading the Classroom— and Not a Moment Too Soon,’ School Library Journal (2006), p. 47. 6 Political Uses of Utopia: New Marxist, Anarchist, and Radical Democratic Perspectives, ed. S.D. Chrostowska and James D. Ingram (New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 2017), p. xii. 7 David Graeber, Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology, Paradigm 14 (Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press, 2004), p. 65. 8 Chrostowska and Ingram, Political Uses of Utopia, pp. xvi–xxii. 9 Mark Blyth, Great Transformations: Economic Ideas and Institutional Change in the Twentieth Century (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002); Jason R. Hackworth, Manufacturing Decline: How Racism and the Conservative Movement Crush the American Rust Belt (New York: Columbia University Press, 2019).
91

Utopia on the Tabletop
alternative communities ready to supplant existing institutions’10 has lost much of its foothold in the contemporary imagination, despite the urgent feeling that we need a better world now more than ever.
Not all utopianists see failure as anathema to the utopian project, and not all TTRPGs are designed to tell stories of victory and triumph. Some games, such as Ten Candles, Trophy Dark, The Quiet Year and The Deep Forest choose to focus on failure, bittersweet and negative emotions, and utopian communities that inevitably come to an end. A game like Dialect, designed by Kathryn Hymes and Hakan Seyalıoğlu, can help us understand how reorienting ourselves to failure and negative emotions through TTRPGs can create room for us to imagine and bring about alternative, better worlds.
Dialect focuses exclusively on failed utopias and contains no traditional action resolution mechanics. A single session of Dialect tells the story of an isolated community, referred to as the Isolation, ‘through its beginning, rise, and end’11 as it attempts to carve out a place in the world separate from a hegemonic society looming in the background. This is a game ‘about language and how it dies,’ so that story is told through a language players invent that is tied to three central Aspects that define their isolation. As Hymes and Seyalıoğlu explain, ‘Aspects are either a single word or a short phrase that represents something fundamental about the Isolation. These will be the touchstones of your society, and the initial seeds from which the language grows.’12 For example, the Martian outpost might have Aspects such as ‘Earth Destroyed by War,’ ‘Shrine to NASA Mars Rover’ and ‘We Are All Children.’ These Aspects will change as your community and language evolve throughout the game until, inevitably, the community and its language die at the hands of the hegemonic society of the world outside the Isolation.
10 Kimberley Kinder, The Radical Bookstore: Counterspace for Social Movements (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2021), p. 8. 11 Kathryn Hymes and Hakan Seyalıoğlu, Dialect: A Game About Language and How It Dies (United States: Thorny Games, 2018), p. 2. 12 Hymes and Seyalıoğlu, Dialect, p. 17.
92

Platt: Finding Utopia in the Failures and Lost Languages of Dialect
The game’s subject matter aligns with what we might expect from a representation of utopia. Hymes and Seyalıoğlu state explicitly in Dialect’s introduction their intent to champion language preservation and cultural pluralism and resist the alarming rate of language loss in our world. They clearly identify the killers of these languages: ‘they are being lost to the mundane everyday pressures of money, violence, social prestige, climate change, and frayed community.’13 After stating this intent, they proceed with the rules of the game, but bookend the rules with another essay by Steven Bird which provides instructions on ‘how players of Dialect can fight language loss both across the world and within their own community.’14 This is a game about bringing about a better world through fostering linguistic and cultural plurality in its fictional world and our real world.
Each session is framed by a backdrop that provides the outline of an Isolation for players to make their own and flesh out during play. These backdrops are written by a wide array of designers alongside Hymes and Seyalıoğlu and provide initial worldbuilding prompts, questions to define two of the Isolation’s three Aspects, and transitions between the three Ages of play that structure the story. The tones and settings of these backdrops vary, but one thing is consistent: the Isolation ‘will be left to simmer in what makes them special. They will change because of it.’15 A utopian story must necessarily ‘assert its radical difference from what currently is’16 in order to offer an alternative vision of a better world and way of being, and Dialect’s attention to the Isolation’s differences from the normative world creates this distance. More often than not, what makes the Isolation ‘special’ is the way in which members of the community are marginalized and oppressed by the normative world outside. This oppression can be abstract, as in Hymes’ and Seyalıoğlu’s ‘The Compound,’ wherein ‘a group has barricaded itself against a world they can no longer take part in’ and
13 Hymes and Seyalıoğlu, Dialect, p. 1. 14 Hymes and Seyalıoğlu, Dialect, p. 117. 15 Hymes and Seyalıoğlu, Dialect, p. 2. 16 Fredric Jameson, Archaeologies of the Future: The Desire Called Utopia and Other Science Fictions (New York: Verso, 2005), p. xv.
93

Utopia on the Tabletop
who ‘will create a new Utopian home.’17 However, at least as often the sources of oppression and marginalization are crystal clear. Laura Simpson’s ‘Slave Uprising,’ Alex Roberts’ ‘Beyond the Village,’ and Ajit George’s ‘Velayuthapuram, Tamil Nadu 2006’ are respectively set in the aftermath of a violent uprising of enslaved people; in the ruins of an urban hellscape among a band of queer artists, laborers, and hustlers; and an imprisoned Dalit community in rural India.18 The varying axes of oppression within these and other backdrops create the pluralism that contemporary utopianism requires and that accompanies the game’s explicit commitment to bringing about a better world.
This thematic pluralism is supported by the game’s depiction of the diverse and often contradictory perspectives that arise in truly democratic spaces.19 Although all players are members of the Isolation, they each relate differently to the Isolation’s Aspects; players’ characters are modeled after fifteen distinct archetypes that are largely defined by their role in the community and their relationship to its Aspects. The Leader, for example, identifies with all of the Aspects, but draws their power from one in particular, whereas the Oracle identifies with two of the Aspects and foresees one of the Aspects being the Isolation’s ruin. Each player relates differently to the fundamental Aspects of their community’s identity and, crucially, are each given equal power at the table. There is no Game Master running the game and Hymes and Seyalıoğlu explicitly state that ‘in Dialect all players have equal authority at the table and a shared stake in the narrative.’20 This democratic approach combines with Dialect’s pluralism and the improvisational nature of TTRPGs to create contingent and openended stories that run counter to utopianism’s authoritarian potential, representing instead ‘a greater pluralism, provisionality, and reflexivity’ that defines much of contemporary utopianism.21
17 Hymes and Seyalıoğlu, Dialect, p. 69. 18 Hymes and Seyalıoğlu, Dialect, pp. 94, 100, 98. 19 See Chantal Mouffe, The Democratic Paradox, Radical Thinkers (New York: Verso, 2009). 20 Hymes and Seyalıoğlu, Dialect, p. 2. 21 Levitas, ‘For Utopia,’ p. 39.
94

