Cataloging & Classification Quarterly
ISSN: 0163-9374 (Print) 1544-4554 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/wccq20
“What Am I Fighting For?”: Creating a Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Plot Metadata
Zach Welhouse, Jin Ha Lee & Jennifer Bancroft
To cite this article: Zach Welhouse, Jin Ha Lee & Jennifer Bancroft (2015) “What Am I Fighting For?”: Creating a Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Plot Metadata, Cataloging & Classification Quarterly, 53:2, 157-189, DOI: 10.1080/01639374.2014.963776 To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/01639374.2014.963776
Published online: 22 Dec 2014. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1829 View related articles View Crossmark data Citing articles: 1 View citing articles
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=wccq20

Cataloging & Classiﬁcation Quarterly, 53:157–189, 2015 Published with license by Taylor & Francis ISSN: 0163-9374 print / 1544-4554 online DOI: 10.1080/01639374.2014.963776
“What Am I Fighting For?”: Creating a Controlled Vocabulary for Video
Game Plot Metadata
ZACH WELHOUSE, JIN HA LEE, and JENNIFER BANCROFT
Information School, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
A video game’s plot is one of its deﬁning features, and prior research conﬁrms the importance of plot metadata to users through persona analysis, interviews, and surveys. However, existing organizational systems, including library catalogs, game-related websites, and traditional plot classiﬁcation systems, do not adequately describe the plot information of video games, in other words, what the game is really about. We attempt to address the issue by creating a controlled vocabulary based on a domain analysis involving a review of relevant literature and existing data structures. The controlled vocabulary is constructed in a pair structure for maximizing ﬂexibility and extensibility. Adopting this controlled vocabulary for describing plot information of games will allow for useful search and collocation of video games.
KEYWORDS video games, interactive media, plot, narrative, metadata, controlled vocabulary, thesaurus
INTRODUCTION
A video game’s story is one of its deﬁning features, especially within plotheavy genres such as Role-Playing Game (RPG), Visual Novel, and ActionAdventure, where the narrative may be a core reason people are attracted to a particular game. For some users, it is the most important aspect of the game—the key reason for deciding what to purchase or play, and even for tolerating poor gameplay.1 However, existing organizational systems including library catalogs or game-related websites do not sufﬁciently describe the plot metadata.
© Zach Welhouse, Jin Ha Lee, and Jennifer Bancroft Received April 2014; revised September 2014; accepted September 2014. Address correspondence to Zach Welhouse, Big Bend Community College, Bonaudi Library, 7662 Chanute Street, Moses Lake, WA 98837, USA. E-mail: zachw@bigbend.edu
157

158

Z. Welhouse et al.

Library catalogs excel at providing reliable information, but catalog records are often sparse in information about a work’s content. Almost no subject access points for video games are currently available in such systems. The systems tend to focus on providing descriptive information such as platform, title, publisher, and price. Genre is the only commonly used metadata element in catalogs and game-related websites that may be considered a subject access point.2 Genre labels may help players make their selection, but often lack standards and detail. Moreover, current genre labels are of little use to game studies researchers interested in speciﬁc subject areas. For example, no scholarly system currently exists for easy collocation of thematic concerns such as apocalyptic imagery, survival, or insanity. On WorldCat, the records of video games sometimes show the brief summary transcribed from the container or secondary source (e.g., Amazon.com, Allgame.com). In other cases, the summary has a strong commercial tone (e.g., “The Reclaimer Saga begins. . . The universe will never be the same.” [Halo 4]), or it is used to describe information other than the plot (e.g., “Beautiful Katamari is the fourth game in the Katamari series of games following Katamari Damacy, We Heart Katamari and Me & My Katamari”). Furthermore, summary information is completely missing in many of the records. Similar observation can be made on the use of Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH) on catalog records for video games; they have been applied inconsistently and thus, many records simply do not contain any subject information.
Some commercial game-related websites and online encyclopedias do provide a detailed summary of the plot of the game. However, they are provided as part of the description rather than being used as an access point. Internet fan sites and Wikipedia also offer summary information, but provide neither the rigor nor comprehensiveness required by scholars researching these topics. Although lists of styles, concepts, or subject headings may occasionally be found in some systems, they are also undeﬁned or inconsistently used which makes it difﬁcult for users to effectively use such metadata to search or browse games. For example, Valve software is currently experimenting with Steam Tags. Every game indexed on its Steam platform has a collection of standardized metadata, which is supplemented with user-generated tags. The stated goal of the system is “helping everyone discover products through a new set of genres, themes, and attributes.”3 However, Steam is limited to Mac, PC, and Linux games and weighted toward commercial transactions. We aim to provide consistent metadata for game players, academics, and other stakeholders who view video games not only as consumer products, but also as part of our cultural heritage and objects of academic research. The objective of our research is to create a controlled vocabulary for the plot/narrative element in video games. This will enable (1) catalogers to provide a more standardized description of plot/narrative in games with increased clarity and (2) the plot/narrative element to be used as an access point to search/browse games. In particular, we attempt to answer

Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Plot Metadata

159

the following research questions: (1) can existing literary plots be used to describe plots in video games and (2) can we use the plot metadata for meaningful collocation of games? This is part of a larger research agenda with a goal of creating a standardized metadata schema and encoding schemes for describing video games and interactive media across multiple organizations in different domains. This project started in 2011 as a joint research effort between the GAme MEtadata Research (GAMER) group at the University of Washington (UW) Information School and the Seattle Interactive Media Museum (SIMM), and is currently in its third phase.4 The objective of SIMM is “to aggregate, research, exhibit, and preserve interactive media culture and the physical, digital, and abstract artifacts therein.”5 In order to accomplish this, a robust and media-speciﬁc metadata schema that can serve a wide variety of use cases is essential.

RELEVANT WORK
Categorizing Basic Plots in Literature
Previous literature suggests that there are two primary methods for describing and organizing plots: appeal elements and keywords. The former draws on a combination of insights from Saricks and Card. Saricks presents the case that all genre ﬁction attracts fans through one of four factors: by appealing to them with (1) adrenaline, (2) emotions, (3) intellect, or (4) landscape.6 Alternatively, Card suggests a “MICE Quotient” stating that all stories have one of four dominant structures that matters most to the author: (1) milieu (world), (2) idea, (3) character, or (4) event.7
On the other hand, the keyword method uses words or phrases to describe the content of a story, such as in work by Polti, Friedman, Aarne and Thompson, Foster-Harris, Tobias, Booker, Uther, Reich, Parker, and so on. For example, themes from these sources included “voyages and returns,” “rags to riches,” and “stories about the Devil.” We reviewed these plot classiﬁcation systems in order to determine how relevant and applicable they would be for describing plots in video games. Certain plot descriptors seemed to be more applicable (e.g., Self-sacriﬁcing for an ideal, Rags to Riches) than others (e.g., The Action Plot, The Quest, Enchanted Relatives) due to scope and/or level of granularity. However, even many of the seemingly useful categories may be too broad when applied to video games (e.g., “Rags to Riches” in Booker’s The Seven Basic Plots8 since most RPG games involve the protagonist accumulating money and experience over time) or the classiﬁcation system is too expansive and complicated for catalogers to easily apply them (e.g., Uther’s The Types of International Folktales described in three volumes).9
The Aarne-Thompson tale type index offers a useful perspective at classifying discrete plot elements; however, its division between types and

160

Z. Welhouse et al.

motifs are more analogous to the UW/SIMM Video Game Metadata Schema’s “Theme” element, which is deﬁned as “a common thread, motif, subject, or idea that recurs in the game.”10 Thompson explains, motifs are “the smallest element in a tale having a power to persist in tradition.”11 In general, they cover character types, objects or processes, and incidents. They are not necessarily what a character does, which is the focus of our interest. For example, “The Maiden without Hands (Type 706),” “The Lazy Boy and the Industrious Girl (Type 822),” and “The Ogre’s (Devil’s) Heart in the Egg (Type 302)” could all be elements of a game’s story, but they do not express the central plot. Types are composed of several motifs, and can form complete story-units. Tracking this level of plot is important in dealing with folktales, which mutate as they are retold, but less important with video games, whose stories are generally set after publication.
Table 1 presents an overview of these different approaches along with examples and reasoning for why, individually, they have limited applicability to describing video game plots. The thirty-six dramatic situations categorized by Polti12 are another good example of why most extant plot classiﬁcation systems fall short in classifying video games. Each of the thirty-six plots breaks into two to six sub-classiﬁcations, each of which are broken down into further sub-classiﬁcations. However, despite their speciﬁcity, these units are, at best, guidelines: “Murder, for instance, may be reduced to a wound, a blow, an attempt, an outrage, an intimidation, a threat, a toohasty word, an intention not carried out, a temptation, a thought, a wish, an injustice, a destruction of a cherish object, a refusal, a want of pity, an abandonment, a falsehood.”13 In video games, these actions are different enough that classifying them together would be at odds with users’ goals.
For this article, the authors speciﬁcally focus on exploring the keyword method of cataloging plots in literature, while another article is currently under preparation to address ideal appeal elements. In order to catalog stories, the authors ﬁrst sought to clarify what exactly is meant by “story.” Different disciplines treat plot, story, and narrative in similar, but conﬂicting, fashion. The Oxford English Dictionary provides a solid starting point, from which we built our catalog-speciﬁc operational deﬁnition. Here, plot is deﬁned as “the plan or scheme of a literary or dramatic work; the main events of a play, novel, ﬁlm, opera, etc., considered or presented as an interrelated sequence; a storyline.”14 Story is deﬁned as “succession of incidents, ‘plot’ (of a novel, poem, or drama).”15 Finally, narrative is described as “the part of a text, esp. a work of ﬁction, which represents the sequence of events, as distinguished from that dealing with dialogue, description, etc. [. . .] narrative is sometimes used to refer to the story as it is supposed to have taken place, whereas plot is used to refer to the way in which the story is revealed.”16 In other words, the narrative is a diegetic sequence of events, plot is how the reader accesses these events, and story ﬁts somewhere in between.

Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Plot Metadata

161

TABLE 1 Overview of Keyword Methods

Classiﬁcation System

Summary

Examples

Limitations to Video Games

Polti (1916)a 36 literary situations

Vengeance of a crime

Categories allow too

based on a list created Disaster

much leniency despite

by Carlo Cozzi.

Rivalry of kinsmen

their speciﬁc titles.

Self-sacriﬁcing for an ideal

Friedman 14 plots based on how The Action Plot

Different users have

(1955)b

the situations affect the The Pathetic Plot

different appeals.

reader.

The Degeneration Plot Broad categories

The Revelation Plot

unsuitable for useful

collocation.

Foster-Harris 3 plots based on the Happy Ending (sacriﬁce) Focus on inner conﬂict.

(1959)c

main character’s

Unhappy Ending (rational) Overly broad categories.

decisions

Literary Plot (inevitability)

Aarne-

Recurring plot points Stories about the devil Limited to naming types

Thompson from folklore.

Enchanted relatives

and motifs.

(1951)d

A clergyman is tricked Rigid categories.

Magic items

System too complicated.

Tobias

20 common plot

Ascension

Too broad as games

(1993)e

classiﬁcations.

Underdog

feature many of these

Pursuit

plot elements.

Booker

7 basic plots.

Rags to Riches

Large categories

(2004)f

The Quest

discourage collocation.

Comedy

Uther

Expansion on the

The Priest and the Devil Limited to naming

(2004)g

Aarne-Thompson

Clergyman in Disguise as characters or themes.

system. Provides

the Devil

Hierarchy not ﬂexible

broader scope, more The Shepherd Youth in

enough.

depth.

the Robber’s Power

System too complicated.

Reich

4 themes: 2 based on The Triumphant Individual Broad categories

(2005)h

hope, 2 based on fear. The Benevolent

unsuitable for useful

Community

collocation.

The Rot at the Top

The Fear at the Gates

Parker

10 plots found on ﬁlm The Fatal Flaw

Less likely to be used for

(2006)i

and television

The Wanderer

user searches.

The Gift Taken Away

Notes. aGeorges Polti, The Thirty-Six Dramatic Situations. Boston: The Writer, Inc., 1916. bNorman Friedman, “Forms of the Plot.” Journal of General Education (1955) 8:241–253. cWilliam Foster-Harris, The Basic Patterns of Plot. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1966. dStith Thompson, The Folktale. New York: The Dryden Press, 1951. eRonald B. Tobias, 20 Master Plots: And How to Build Them. Cincinnati: Writer’s Digest Books, 1993. fChristopher Booker, The Seven Basic Plots: Why We Tell Stories. London: Continuum International Pub-
lishing Group, 2004. gHans-Jo¨rg Uther, The Types of International Folktales: Animal Tales, Tales of Magic, Religious Tales,
and Realistic Tales, with an Introduction (No. 284). Helskinka: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 2004. hRobert Reich, “The Lost Art of Democratic Narrative,” Robertreich.org. Last modiﬁed March 2005.
http://robertreich.org/reich/20050321.asp iPhilip Parker, The Art and Science of Screenwriting. Bristol: Intellect. 2006.

162

Z. Welhouse et al.

Richard Boon’s deﬁnition, speciﬁcally written about video games, provides a contrasting view:

A story may be deﬁned as a collection of events which, when collated, provide some degree of meaning. A plot is a means by which to collate the events of a story, to allow it to make sense to its audience. Causality is of primary importance here. Characters must have motivation, events must display cause and effect, themes must arise from the elements of the story—or the story will not appeal to human beings. . . . Narrative is a term which describes the act of telling a story. A given story with a given plot may still be told in many different ways. Cinema ably demonstrates this—The Seven Samurai recreated as The Magniﬁcent Seven or Battle Beyond the Stars, for instance. In each movie, the basic story (warriors are amassed to defend the downtrodden; they do so for their own reasons; a proportion of the warriors die whilst doing so) is the same, and the plot (na¨ıve non-combatant seeks out and recruits the warriors in series before amassing them for the ﬁnal battle) is also very similar. But the narrative (including aspects of setting, cinematography (dictating tone), character and pace) may be very different.17

Our system is concerned with Boon’s deﬁnition of story, rather than any of the framing elements of the narrative. For example, it views The Iliad as the story of an epic war between the Trojans and the Greeks. The scheme does not refer to the narrative’s ﬂashbacks or multiple points of view (or, for that matter, any of the complex human dramas that populate the work). It would also be more accurate to consider our work as describing the story rather than the plot due to the fact that preserving causality and/or the sequence of events is not the primary focus. Although what our element is trying to describe is Boon’s deﬁnition of story, in the metadata schema, the researchers decided to keep the name of the element as “plot” rather than story. This was based on the principle of user warrant18 as “plot” was the term most often used by game players who were interviewed for developing the UW/SIMM Video Game Metadata Schema.19

Prior Work on Access to Video Games
As previously discussed, the work described in this article is part of a larger project aiming to create an ontology and metadata schema for video games and interactive media, led by the GAMER Group at University of Washington Information School and SIMM.20,21 The motivation for the project was to provide a framework for standardized description and organization of video games and interactive media. This is necessary because other existing schemas and standards such as Dublin Core (DC), Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records (FRBR), Resource Description and Access (RDA),

Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Plot Metadata

163

Cataloging Cultural Objects (CCO), and CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model (CIDOC CRM) are often too broad and/or not as relevant for describing speciﬁc information objects such as video games.22,23,24,25
In response to this need for domain-speciﬁc Knowledge Organization (KO) solutions for description, organization, and preservation of video games, several other research initiatives were also launched. In the Library and Information Science (LIS) domain, The Preserving Virtual Worlds project, which focused on investigating issues in, and establishing strategies for, game preservation,26 and Winget’s video game preservation project, targeted for artifacts from the video game creation process,27 are prime examples. Both projects heavily center on preservation issues, leaving the need for addressing the description issue.
Other examples of best practice guidelines also exist, but with limitations. For example, Intner and Studwell suggested classifying video games as a subgenre of videos using LCSH. However, they also accede to the creation of specialized classiﬁcation schemes under special circumstances when there is an evident need for additional descriptors due to the size or composition of a particular collection.28 Robare’s video game cataloging guidelines at the University of Oregon provide increased focus on descriptive metadata but limit it to a short, objective description, and in the guidelines, it also indicates that it will not be possible to ﬁnd appropriate subject headings to record in the 65X ﬁeld of the MARC record.29 Donohue also suggests local supplements to LCSH in the 690 (local topical term) ﬁeld,30 but these are limited to number of players, game console, and genre. Librarians including Lyons and Tappeiner focus on small, speciﬁc audiences, and explore ways to use tags and controlled vocabulary for improving users’ access to video games.31 In “Game Genres Demystiﬁed,” McCann also acknowledges the lack of standardized criteria for deﬁning game genres, stating that the unofﬁcial list is contentious and changing.32 Nevertheless, he identiﬁes major categories for use in collection development and event programming. GAMER and SIMM intend to go beyond genre to provide the careful, nuanced, and internally consistent cataloging backbone that can form the foundation of efforts such as Lyons and Tappeiner’s and ﬁnd a logical place for McCann’s contentious games. We aim to ﬁll the gaps between preservation-focused systems, descriptive systems that shoehorn games into pre-existing library categories, and guidelines on best practices. This project concentrates speciﬁcally on creating an ontology and metadata schema from the perspective of general video game users.
Multiple sub-projects were carried out, related to different elements and/or issues regarding the UW/SIMM schema creation. The sub-project that is particularly relevant to this study is Lee et al. reporting their work on facet analysis of video game genres.33 As previously stated, subject access to games in commercial game-related websites tends to primarily focus on genre. However, empirical analysis of genre labels that are currently used

164

Z. Welhouse et al.

on such websites revealed that the labels are overloaded with information representing multiple dimensions.34 In fact, Lee et al. were able to identify 12 different dimensions expressed in these labels: gameplay, style, purpose, target audience, presentation, artistic style, temporal aspect, point-of-view, theme, setting, mood/affect, and type of ending.35 Each of these dimension represents some type of information that can help users better ﬁnd the games they may want, understand the content of the game, and determine if they will indeed purchase/play the game. Certain dimensions are more closely related to what we are describing in this article; in particular, temporal aspect (i.e., how time passes in the game), theme (i.e., the common threads or ideas that recur in the game), setting (i.e., the environment where the game takes place), mood/affect (i.e., the pervading atmosphere or tone of the game that evokes certain emotion), and type of ending (i.e., the characteristics describing how the game ends). Most of these dimensions were incorporated into the revised version of metadata schema36 as independent elements (e.g., Theme, Setting) or attributes of elements (e.g., gameplay and style represented under “Genre”). The Plot controlled vocabulary described in this article is to be used for the element “Plot” in the schema. Along with other 39 elements, we envision that the schema will provide rich data about video games that would be useful for a number of use cases by different stakeholders (e.g., entertainment, research, preservation). Ultimately, we aim to create an ontology expressing the relationships among different entities in the video game domain and these metadata elements as attributes of these entities.37

Importance of Plot/Narrative to Game Players
In order to create a user-centered metadata schema and encoding schemes, we conducted a number of user studies to improve our understanding of what kind of information game players value and how they refer to particular concepts in the video game domain. Multiple methods including personas, semi-structured interviews, and surveys were employed in these studies.
During the ﬁrst phase of the joint research effort, the researchers identiﬁed six user personas (archetypes representing the needs, behaviors, and goals of a particular group of users)38 likely to seek information about video games: game players, parents of young players, collectors, scholars, game developers/designers, and librarians/curators.39 Later, three additional personas were added: casual gamers, teachers/educators, and industry professionals (in addition to game developers/designers). Different user scenarios based on these personas served as a basis for determining an initial list of core and recommended metadata elements. Although the plot information will be most useful to game players and parents of young gamers, other

Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Plot Metadata

165

personas can also beneﬁt from it, especially if there were an organizational system that describes the plot or narrative of the game allowing selective searching/browsing of plot elements. For example, a parent looking for a game about the courtly ideal of knighthood, rather than the straightforward hack-and-slash of many games with medieval themes could deprioritize concepts such as “kill,” “battle,” and “conquer.” Curators could put together exhibits of games with similar stories, and librarians could design a thematic display matching a video game to novels, movies, and nonﬁction books with the same plot elements. Scholars and game developers could use the scheme to trace the history of themes in gaming, such as small town development, the apocalypse, and interactions with the American West. They will be able to answer questions such as “Why are there no games that handle a theme in a certain way?” or “What does it mean that only indie developers are writing game stories that handle certain topics?” Not all of these questions can be answered solely within the plot metadata ﬁeld; however, incorporating such a metadata ﬁeld in an organizational system will lay the groundwork for interaction with other elements, such as genre and visual style. Users will be able to mix-and-match metadata elements for reasons as diverse as trend analysis and suggestions on what to play next.
Following the analysis of personas, a total of 56 users representing a variety of personas were interviewed.40,41 Researchers asked about multiple aspects of their video game playing experience and sought their opinions on the usefulness of the metadata elements. The interviews included sets of questions on their experience with video games, their video game collection and how they organize it, and their general game searching behavior, such as “What kinds of information about games are most important to you when you are searching for new games to play?” This helped us understand the terms that are typically used in the video game domain, and also the types of game-related information frequently sought by individuals with an interest in video games.
Analyzing the transcripts revealed that 21 of the 56 interviewees mentioned story/plot/narrative as an important factor, many naming it one of their top ﬁve, but no one knew of an effective way to search video games by it. One avid gamer (participant 14) said her major motivation for playing video games was that she really liked stories, especially the stories you can participate in, yet when asked what would help her search by plot, she conceded,

I think it is one of those hard things, because if you go too detailed then you are kind of giving away parts of the game, but if you go too general, I would say that these examples would be slightly too general for me to be particularly interested in the game. Particularly because lots of games are where the protagonist explores the world. . . . So I think,

166

Z. Welhouse et al.

maybe adding in something like, this is what they are kind of trying to do and this is how they’re doing it. So the characters prevent the apocalypse by gathering all these orbs or something.

This comment did have an impact on the granularity of the controlled vocabulary we designed. This same person described her impression of the difference between known and unknown item searches as follows:

I think if you are looking for games you’ve already heard of, title and series or franchise/universe are all important, but I think if you are looking for games that you haven’t heard of that kind of plot and narrative and theme and point of view are probably ones that are going to be more important . . . it makes more sense to have something that is also searchable and has lots of terms for like style and plot and narrative and theme, because I think in the same way someone searches for movies, you do kind of look for those things as well, at least I do, in a video game. Like, oh, does this have an interesting story?

An interviewed librarian (participant 40) declared that a brief description of the story would be especially useful for providing readers’ advisory service. A high school teacher (participant 56) interviewed referred to creating an educational opportunity within the game, “where you’re taking something that’s hugely popular to begin with, and now tying it into education,” and gave the example of Project WOW:

Several schools have been very successful in implementing a curriculum for language arts and that revolve around World of Warcraft. . . . And part of what they’re doing is journaling about their hero’s experience in the game, but also comparing it to a hero in a novel that they’re reading.

Such lesson planning would be easier if video games could be searched by plots to complement the literature included in the curriculum. Another interviewed gamer (participant 20) described an experience similar to when readers are pleasantly surprised by a crossover into a different genre than what they typically read:

I’m not a big fantasy-setting person. I like settings that are historically accurate or—if a game is set in medieval times, I like it to be like medieval Europe or whatever. That being said, Skyrim is not set on the planet Earth at all, but what it lacks on that side, it makes up for in story and graphics.

When seeking suggestions of new games to play, searching by plot could allow for users like this Skyrim player to be enticed into a different setting or genre than usually preferred. A plot search allows this player to discover a new favorite game they otherwise might have missed if left up to chance

Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Plot Metadata

167

or current search options. That same interviewee stressed the importance of a good story in a game: “[it] will create an emotional attachment to the character. A good story will make them almost take on a life of their own.” Although knowing the appeal elements may help ﬁnd a game with a story that would provoke the player’s emotions, being able to ﬁlter by plots that dealt with inner struggles, relationships, and the like would provide a means to ﬁnd new satisfying titles to play. The description of the game D by one of the gamers interviewed (participant 28) exempliﬁes this well:

What, so, a very tiny horror, ﬁrst person horror game about a girl and her Dad, like that’s really interesting to me, and that’s not the way most people would describe D, but that’s really what it is. It’s just very overlooked. But that kind of story is really relevant to me, because I love my Dad and the whole Dad–daughter relationship is very unexplored in games, I think. So, to ﬁnd a commercial game for the PlayStation that focused on that, that doesn’t like over explain it or anything, but that’s just there, that fascinates me.

She goes on to describe current cataloging failings stating “a lot of people wouldn’t ascribe that kind of subject matter to D; they would, if you were to tell people, ‘I’m making a game library, categorize this game for me,’ here’s what they’d do: they go to PlayStation, survival horror, ﬁrst person, maybe something like castles, but that doesn’t mean much.” In some cases, a good story can be perceived to be more important than other critical elements of video games such as gameplay: “if the story is good I’ll play it regardless of the type of gameplay” (Participant 13).
The importance of plot information to users was also conﬁrmed in the survey results. A total of 1,257 participants who interact with video games completed the online survey with a similar set of questions asked to the interviewees. One of the questions the survey participants were asked was to rate the usefulness of 43 different metadata elements; “Plot/Narrative” was ranked as the seventh most useful element with positive responses from 71% of all participants.42

METHOD
Domain analysis and card sorting design methods were employed in creating the controlled vocabulary. Hjørland identiﬁed eleven ways domains can be studied and understood, one of which was to create “special classiﬁcations and thesauri (especially the facet-based approaches) [to] organise the logical structures of categories and concepts in a domain as well as the semantic relations between the concepts.”43 Mai explains “the core of the domain analytic approach is to study the activity and products of domains to gain insights into ‘already there’ structures and meanings.”44 The notion of what

168

Z. Welhouse et al.

constitutes a domain is not completely clear in Hjørland and Albrechtsen,45 but Mai deﬁnes it as “an area of expertise, a body of literature, or a group of people working together in an organization.”46 Pejtersen designed the Book House computer program according to similar principles, creating a multi-dimensional classiﬁcation scheme reﬂecting users’ reading needs.47 The project analyzed user’s desires within a speciﬁc domain and mapped them to document content, which could be encoded as metadata.
As the ﬁrst step in our domain analysis, we collected candidate terms from various games and game-related websites. The initial candidate terms were collected from a broad cross section of RPGs. The authors drew on the games’ instruction books, in-game text, package descriptions, and fan-created online descriptions. Then we examined numerous game-related commercial, hobby, and review websites, wikis, and encyclopedias (e.g., GiantBomb, Wikipedia, RPGamer, GameSpot, Steam, and IGN) as well as examples of video games. At this stage, any term that was used at least once was included in the master list.
The initial list of terms was massive and unwieldy. During the second stage of vocabulary control, the authors used card sorting technique48 to organize the terms into more manageable categories and conceptualize a framework for describing the different types of plots in video games. Patterns and common themes started to emerge among the unﬁltered mass of terms. Infrequently used terms were evaluated based on their relevance: many became non-preferred terms or were removed as irrelevant outliers. Functionally similar terms were merged while overly-speciﬁc terms (such as “Poke´mon”) were broadened and made more accessible. Terms that already existed, wholesale or as synonyms, in a related controlled vocabulary (such as genre) were culled, but noted in the “commonly paired with other terms/words” column to aid later cataloging.
The terms were further evaluated based on the following criteria: accuracy, understandability, and comprehensiveness. Accurate terms ensure a strong link between the descriptors and the concepts described. The terms are either taken straight from game descriptions or slightly altered to create intuitive, compartmentalized distinctions, such as the difference between “battle” and “confront.” Additionally, the scope notes are provided to improve the understandability of each preferred term. Altogether, the terms in the current controlled vocabulary provide a fairly comprehensive set of options for describing plots in video games. However, we also recognize that ensuring comprehensiveness of terms is an ongoing process, as video game writers constantly explore new plots.
During this stage, we developed key terms in the controlled vocabulary concurrently with a verb–object structure for contextualizing plot (further discussed in the next section). Our goal was to account for the variety of games that currently exist, trusting the ﬂexibility of the pair structure to help construct categories for future plot trends as they occur.

Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Plot Metadata

169

DISCUSSION ON THE CONTROLLED VOCABULARY
The Pair Structure
We use a pair structure to meaningfully describe and represent common narrative themes within games, inspired by a faceted approach.49 Unlike a simple list or a hierarchical structure, our faceted structure provides a way to put together multiple terms in different combinations to represent the plot information. The mix-and-match structure system is ﬂexible enough to cover a wide range of plots and narrow enough in scope to capture the narrative essence of individual games. The use of controlled term lists for each pair element allows for collocation along similar narrative themes.
Each pair consists of a VERB and OBJECT, each with its own controlled vocabulary. The full controlled vocabulary is provided in Appendix A (VERB) and B (OBJECT).

VERB: a transitive verb (that is, a verb that requires a direct object) that describes a primary narrative action within the game. Examples from our controlled list include “seek,” “alter,” “battle,” and “solve.”
OBJECT: a noun that acts as the object of the verb, describing a person, place, thing, or idea that is central to the narrative action. For example, “seeking treasure,” “escaping a dystopia,” or “restoring order.”

All pairs also have an implied SUBJECT element that describes the player-character (s). The VERB and OBJECT controlled vocabularies are continually being revised even at the time of this writing. Currently, the controlled vocabularies focus primarily on narrative themes commonly found in Western and Japanese role-playing games. This is because unlike other games, which may or may not have plots, role-playing games always have a readily identiﬁable narrative component. Moreover, these plots are often complex, and provide a powerful stress test for the pair structure. As the thesaurus is expanded, it will need to incorporate terms that cover plots from other genres, such as shooters, survival horror games, computer adventure games, and so on.
Since the narratives in RPGs can be quite elaborate, encompassing multiple plot points and goals, each game was restricted to three plot pairs within the SIMM catalog. Providing for any greater number increases the temptation to catalog every side story, regardless of its impact on the overall game. Catalogers are encouraged to use all three available pairs, pushing descriptions of games beyond the singular most evident plot element. Otherwise, many RPGs could simply be described by (Characters) save world. For example, Chrono Trigger, a game about traveling through time, righting wrongs, and defeating an alien parasite could be summarized as (Characters) save world. However, the narrative ﬁeld for Chrono Trigger would be more useful if it contained three pairs:

170

Z. Welhouse et al.

TABLE 2 Sample Video Games and Their Plot Metadata Game Shin Megami Tensei: Persona 3 Final Fantasy Tactics: The War of the Lions Dragon Quest IX: Sentinels of the Starry Sky Suikoden V Fallout

Pairs
(Characters) develop friendship. (Characters) confront self. (Characters) prevent disaster. (Characters) discover intrigue. (Characters) save world. (Characters) develop army. (Characters) seek treasure. (Characters) prevent disaster. (Characters) restore order. (Characters) confront intrigue. (Characters) develop army. (Characters) restore birthright. (Characters) survive dystopia. (Characters) explore dystopia. (Characters) save world.

(Characters) alter time. (Characters) battle greater being. (Characters) prevent disaster.
Table 2 shows the plot metadata for ﬁve additional sample games in order to illustrate how the controlled vocabulary can be applied.
Testing the Applicability of the Controlled Vocabulary
In order to further test the applicability of the controlled vocabulary, the authors cataloged a sample of 74 video games, mostly focusing on RPGs with elaborate narratives. These sample records are available in their entirety in Appendix C. In addition, several examples are listed in Table 3 to illustrate how the plot element can aid in game collocation.
As additional games are cataloged at SIMM, it would be possible to collocate more games with similar plot elements. Collocation based on plot elements can complement genre categorization and create interesting subcategories. Note that most of these games are RPGs and therefore would most likely appear under the single “RPG” category on typical game-related websites. Once we have a signiﬁcant number of games categorized, it would also be possible to do various analyses; for instance, a historical analysis investigating how the narratives delivered by games have changed over time or a co-occurrence analysis exploring which plot elements most frequently appear together in video games. Furthermore, a comparison of common plot elements in video games with those in other types of media may be possible.

Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Plot Metadata

171

TABLE 3 Illustration on How Games Can Be Collocated Using the Plot Element

Plot

Games

Alter Time
Confront Morality Confront Self Develop Business Develop Love Discover Knowledge Explore Alternate
Universe Prevent Disaster
Restore Order
Return Home Seek Allies Seek Treasure
Solve Mystery

Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time, Radiant Historia, Chrono Trigger, The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time, Final Fantasy XIII-2
Catherine, Fable, Mass Effect, Ogre Battle: Let Us Cling Together, Radiata Stories, Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic
Xenogears, Shin Megami Tensei: Persona 4, Persona 2: Innocent Sin, Heavy Rain
Torneko’s Mystery Dungeon, Recettear: An Item Shop’s Tale, Atelier Rorona: The Alchemist of Arland
Ar Tonelico II: Melody of Metafalica, Final Fantasy X, The Last Story, Shadow Hearts
Bastion, BioShock, Breath of Fire 3, Breath of Fire 4, Star Ocean: Till the End of Time, Tales of Graces F, Tales of Symphonia
Kingdom Hearts, Star Ocean: Till the End of Time, Tales of Symphonia, Tales of Graces F
Breath of Fire 4, Chrono Trigger, Costume Quest, Defender’s Quest: Valley of the Forgotten, Dragon Quest IX: Sentinels of the Starry Sky, Final Fantasy XIII-2, Mass Effect, Radiant Historia, Shin Megami Tensei: Persona 3, Shin Megami Tensei: Persona 4
Batman: Arkham City, Dragon Quest IX: Sentinels of the Starry Sky, Dragon Warrior, Final Fantasy, Final Fantasy III, Final Fantasy VII, Final Fantasy VIII, Final Fantasy IX, Final Fantasy Legend 2, Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time, Tales of Symphonia, The Last Story
Final Fantasy X, Defender’s Quest: Valley of the Forgotten, The World Ends with You
Chrono Cross, Pokemon White: Version 2, Radiata Stories, Valkyrie Proﬁle
Costume Quest, Dragon Quest IX: Sentinels of the Starry Sky, Final Fantasy, Final Fantasy Legend 2, Legend of Legaia, Nethack, Recettear: An Item Shop’s Tale, Super Mario RPG: Legend of the Seven Stars, Torneko’s Mystery Dungeon
BioShock, Catherine, Final Fantasy XIII-2, Heavy Rain, L.A. Noire, Persona 2: Innocent Sin, Portal, Radiant Historia, The World Ends with You

ISSUES AND LIMITATIONS
Granularity
The most signiﬁcant challenge of any attempt to summarize a story is the issue of granularity. How does one distill a complex storyline to something reasonably simple? Generally speaking, a large percentage of video games will have a storyline that involves “a hero saving the world,” leaving that broad of a scope meaningless in a catalog setting. On the other hand, a storyline like “a tycoon builds roller coasters” would be applicable to an insigniﬁcantly small number of games, so that level of speciﬁcity would also be ineffective.

172

Z. Welhouse et al.

Even moderate granularity poses challenges if a game contains side quests and non-linear content. Many RPGs contain optional storylines which, if completed, change the game’s narrative. Williams explains, “Well designed role-playing games are replete with missions to be ignored or embraced. Before his date with destiny and a mysterious girl at the fair. . . . Crono can see the world around him.”50 Such optional exploration can reveal background information that recontextualizes character actions, such as the post-game content in The World Ends with You. Optional storylines also offer points of divergence for the central narrative. Valkyrie Proﬁle is about training dead warriors for Ragnarok, but the player is allowed to rebel against this mission to establish romance and a stronger sense of self for the protagonist. Following the second path opens up new stages and stories, while limiting others. Player choice complicates the division between a game’s core plot content and supplemental information. This issue is also complicated when the players are provided with moral choices in video games (e.g., Fable, Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic). Depending on the player’s choice, the plot/narrative in parts of the game can turn out to be signiﬁcantly different.
The constantly evolving landscape of video games means that any attempt at a controlled vocabulary must be ﬂexible enough to incorporate any new game. However, with enough adjustment to the scope of granularity, every story can be traced back to the archetypal stories identiﬁed by the literature analyses mentioned above. Evaluating the granularity so it is neither too ﬁne nor too coarse is a constant process which must incorporate cataloger’s judgment as well as user testing.

Varied Roles of Plot in Games
The cataloging process is also complicated by the importance that fans and creators assign to a game’s plot. The distinction between a game’s story and its mechanics is not always easy to separate without masking a game’s unique traits. Conversely, it is important to guard against describing features of the game when the intention is to describe the story. Features such as “6 hours of gameplay? Try 6 billion,” or “classic roguelike play re-imagined as a unique single-screen puzzle game sort of thing!” give information about gameplay but do not give a good sense of the “aboutness” of the game.51
Catalogers should aim to encapsulate what happens in the game and not how a user plays it. For example, many RPGs feature combat with monsters. However, frequently the monsters are only incidental to the plot; they are a mechanism for the player to interact with the game between “plot scenes” where the only action is pressing a button to forward the dialogue. In cases like this, the plot may be more about ﬁnding love (or knowledge, redemption, etc.) than ﬁghting the monsters that stand in its way.

Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Plot Metadata

173

Just like in other forms of media, not all video game plots are created equal. Myst is famous for its clever puzzles, but the story is about exploring an environment and discovering the secrets behind books and their missing owners. In playing the game, the plot seems incidental to the compelling atmosphere and challenge of solving puzzles. Nevertheless, the exploration and monographic detective work are worth cataloging; other metadata ﬁelds, such as genre, address the logic puzzles and core mechanics. At the other end of the spectrum, some games have no plot (e.g., Tetris) or have a more or less irrelevant plot (e.g., Mortal Kombat). If no plot exists, the ﬁeld must remain empty; however, even the most irrelevant-seeming plots may be of interest to scholars and fans. A professor teaching game design (participant 51) put it this way in his interview, “For me, as much metadata as possible is better than too little. Or, even if I’m never going to use it, somebody else might, right?” When it is unclear if a particular plot element should be described for a game or not, the authors found it helpful to think about the issue from the general users’ perspectives (i.e., would a typical user ﬁnd it helpful to search for games using plot element X and see game Y in the results?).

Catalogers’ Background Knowledge
There are also challenges in any classiﬁcation system used to describe aspects of the story in a metadata record. Does the cataloger need to have played the video game to adequately describe the storyline? Many RPG games take 40–70 hours for a single complete playthrough. Even just watching the plot scenes on YouTube could take up several hours per game. Since that seems unfeasible, the cataloger would often need to consult secondary sources. Which sources should be considered authoritative? How much investigation should a cataloger do to uncover the story of obscure games, or games with complex narratives with multiple endings? Most of the information in a library catalog record is taken from the item itself.52 However, plot (like genre) requires a greater degree of effort to determine than simply examining the title frames. This difﬁculty suggests that crowdsourcing the plot information, to complement the cataloger’s judgment, might prove to be useful in reducing the burden on the cataloger.
As for the secondary sources, although the authors of this article primarily drew on their personal knowledge of the games and consulted ofﬁcial game websites and Wikipedia in order to assign plot metadata, there are many possibilities. Other potentially valid sources for information are ofﬁcial strategy guides and marketing/distribution platforms such as Xbox Live and Steam. These sources have a vested interest in accurately representing their games. If a game’s plot tags cannot be aligned with creator-inﬂuenced

174

Z. Welhouse et al.

content, the gaming press can assist. Long-running game-related websites such as IGN, GameSpot, and Allgame can be trusted to ﬁll the missing gaps.

Spoilers
The level of scrutiny required of accurate plot representation has one major casualty: spoilers. Users have varying degrees of sensitivity to spoilers, and it is important to accommodate these needs. This concern can be dealt with at the interface level, similar to the “last words” feature at LibraryThing.com. Here, the last several words of the book can be accessed after clicking a protective link. For example, the instruction book and promotional materials for the 1996 release of Final Fantasy III obscure a major plot point: halfway through the game, the villain nearly destroys the world. The narrative jumps forward several months to one of the survivors, who must gather her companions and defeat the villain. Some users, who value novelty and surprise, would not want to know right away that Final Fantasy III is tagged with “Survive Disaster” and “Restore Order.” To accommodate these users, those two pairs could be hidden by the interface of the information retrieval system utilizing the plot metadata. Users would need to make a conscious decision to view the masked information.

Need for Additional Free-Text Fields for Summary Information
Another potential issue is that many games present their narratives in ways that are initially fragmentary and confusing. Story cues come from many places, including “on the package, in the manual, or in intro-sequences, placing the player’s playing in the context of a larger story (back-story), and/or creating an ideal story that the player has to realize.”53 Therefore, it seems optimal to have an additional free-text ﬁeld where the summary from the publisher (back of the box, manual, publisher’s site, etc.) is presented in full, available for users to read and for the system to parse for keywords. This will also especially help with handling new games that have important story elements not covered in the controlled vocabulary.
Expanding on the idea of a free-text ﬁeld, an even more complete picture of a game could be achieved by adding a separate free-text summary prepared by the actual cataloger. In library cataloging, provisions are given for free-text summarizing of content in both Anglo-American Cataloguing Rules, Second Edition (AACR2) (1.7B17) and RDA (7.10). In MARC, the optional 520 ﬁeld is the place to record a summary of the item’s content “unless another part of the description provides enough information” (AACR2 2.7B17). This ﬁeld is frequently used in bibliographic records for audiovisual materials. For example, a description for the ﬁlm Raising Arizona was given

Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Plot Metadata

175

this summary: “An ex-convict and a police ofﬁcer decide to get married and start a family. To their dismay, they discover that they can neither have nor adopt children. Desperate, they resort to kidnapping one of the newborn quintuplets of the wealthy Arizona family. However, their attempt at living a normal life is complicated by neurotic co-workers, two fugitives, and a mysterious bounty hunter.”54
This type of free-form ﬁeld would provide a way to ﬂesh out the representation of a game within a catalog. While the VERB–OBJECT example would allow easy user discovery of similar games, a free-text summary ﬁeld would allow more thorough description of those games that do not easily ﬁt into established categories. The summary would likely prove attractive to gamers and non-gamers alike, but especially those who are not familiar with typical video game tropes but trying to determine the appropriateness of materials for their needs. The ﬂexibility to describe a game using both controlled vocabulary and free-form text would give catalogers the power to describe aspects of a game which cannot be accounted for anywhere else in the record. Although we can see several individual examples of catalog records in WorldCat that use the summary ﬁeld for these purposes, they need to be applied in a more consistent manner. This again highlights the importance of crowdsourcing such data, as this information will be signiﬁcantly easier for people who actually played the game to describe. Exploring how to effectively incorporate crowdsourced data into catalog records and still maintain the reasonable level of accuracy would be crucial for successfully populating the summary data.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The article presents our ﬁrst step in creating a controlled vocabulary for the plot element to represent the aboutness of video games. Combining the plot elements with the rich vocabularies of other metadata elements such as theme, setting, genre, visual style, and mood should provide an invaluable method of identifying, discovering, and recommending a video game. These subject metadata ﬁelds in our schema can provide a useful map for the vast and ever-expanding realm of video games that will enable meaningful exploration of game content as well as discovery of new games.
The pair structure sets the stage for further reﬁnement, which we hope will ultimately aid gamers’ advisory service, recommending new games for library users. In future iterations of the scheme, catalogers can potentially weigh plot elements based on their importance to the game’s story. This tiered ranking of plot pairs would allow librarians to recommend games with more certainty and provide gamers with more relevant data to aid their browsing. For example, if a gamer was interested in discovering more games about self-discovery and friendship, games where these topics were primary

176

Z. Welhouse et al.

concerns rather than tertiary ones would be best. If a gamer is tired of saving the world by preventing apocalypse, but sees it only plays a minor part in a game’s overall plot, he or she may be willing to try it. Weighted pairs also help distinguish between games that share the same basic plots but emphasize certain elements differently. This level of cataloging precision offers many exciting opportunities, but would also invite more subjective judgments than those with which some catalogers are comfortable. Within the UW/SIMM catalog, in order to ameliorate this problem, we are exploring various options such as working in partnership with commercial game websites (e.g., Mobygames) as well as setting up an online database for crowdsourcing the data relying on game experts and enthusiasts, following a union catalog model.
Furthermore, in order to support the reuse of our metadata schema and controlled vocabularies, we also plan to collaborate with the GAMECIP (GAme MEtadata and Citation Project),55 led by UCSC Library, UCSC Computer Science, and Stanford University Library, and submit our controlled vocabulary to Simple Knowledge Organization System (SKOS).56 Through collaboration, ultimately we aim to establish an ontology to describe the entities and relationships in the video game domain in common standards such as Resource Description Framework (RDF) and Web Ontology Language (OWL) for maximum reuse in the library and information science community. The future versions of our metadata schema will also continue to be published on the UW GAMER Group’s ofﬁcial release page.57

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors extend special thanks to Violet Fox and Alison Lane for contribution of ideas and research for this article and in creating the controlled vocabularies, and to INFO498/INFX598 participants for their valuable feedback.
NOTES
1. Jin Ha Lee et al., “User-Centered Approach in Creating a Metadata Scheme for Video Games and Interactive Media” (paper presented at proceedings of the 13th ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital Libraries, Indianapolis, IN, July 22–26, 2013: 229–238).
2. Jin Ha Lee et al., “Facet Analysis of Video Game Genres” (paper presented in proceedings of the 2014 iConference, Berlin, Germany, March 4–7, 2014: 125–139).
3. “Introducing Steam Tags, A Powerful New Way to Shop for Games,” Valve Corporation. http://store.steampowered.com/tag/ (accessed July 19, 2014).
4. “Constructing a Metadata Schema for Video Games and Interactive Media: Creating a Metadata Schema that Captures the Essential Information about Video Games and Interactive Media in a Standardized Way,” GAme MEtadata Research Group. http://gamer.ischool.uw.edu/ (accessed July 20, 2014).

Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Plot Metadata

177

5. “Mission,” The Seattle Interactive Media Museum. http://www.thesimm.org/ (accessed July 20, 2014).
6. Joyce G. Saricks, The Readers’ Advisory Guide to Genre Fiction (Chicago: American Library Association, 2001), 3–5.
7. Orson S. Card and Writer’s Digest Books, The Writer’s Digest Guide to Science Fiction & Fantasy (Cincinnati, OH: Writer’s Digest Books, 2010), 77.
8. Christopher Booker, The Seven Basic Plots: Why We Tell Stories (London: Continuum International Publishing Group, 2004).
9. Hans-Jo¨rg Uther, The Types of International Folktales: Animal Tales, Tales of Magic, Religious Tales, and Realistic Tales, with an Introduction (No. 284) (Helskinka: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 2004).
10. UW/SIMM Video Game Metadata Schema. http://gamer.ischool.uw.edu/wp-content/uploads/ 2014/04/UWSIMMschema_v2.0.pdf (accessed April 30, 2014).
11. Stith Thompson, The Folktale (New York: The Dryden Press, 1951), 415. 12. Georges Polti, The Thirty-Six Dramatic Situations (Boston: The Writer, Inc., 1916), 119. 13. Ibid., 119. 14. “plot, n.” OED Online. Last modiﬁed March 2014. Oxford University Press. http://www. oed.com/view/Entry/145915?rskey=SgK1cq&result=1&isAdvanced=false 15. “story, n.1” OED Online. Last modiﬁed March 2014. Oxford University Press. http://www. oed.com/view/Entry/190981?rskey=LkSmDy&result=1&isAdvanced= 16. “narrative, n.” OED Online. Last modiﬁed March 2014. Oxford University Press. http://www. oed.com/view/Entry/125146?rskey=coVhG0&result=1&isAdvanced=false 17. Richard Boon, quoted in Chris Bateman, “Story, Plot, & Narrative,” Only a Game (blog), August 18, 2005. http://onlyagame.typepad.com/only_a_game/2005/08/story_plot_narr.html 18. National Information Standards Organization, ANSI/NISO Z39.19–1993 Guidelines for the Construction, Format and Management of Monolingual Thesauri (Bethesda, MD: NISO Press, 1994). 19. Jin Ha Lee et al., “A Qualitative Investigation of Users’ Video Game Information Needs and Behaviors” (in preparation). 20. Jin Ha Lee et al., “Developing a Video Game Metadata Schema for the Seattle Interactive Media Museum,” International Journal on Digital Libraries 13, no. 2 (2013): 105–117. 21. Jin Ha Lee et al., “Empirical Evaluation of Metadata for Video Games and Interactive Media,” Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology (JASIST) (in press). 22. Liddy Nevile and Sophie Lissonnet, “Was CIMI Too Early? Dublin Core and Museum Information: Metadata as Cultural Heritage Data,” DCMI International Conference on Dublin Core and Metadata Applications (2005): 31–38. http://dcpapers.dublincore.org/pubs/article/view/801 (accessed July 1, 2014). 23. Murtha Baca et al., Cataloging Cultural Objects: A Guide to Describing Cultural Works and Their Images (Chicago: American Library Association, 2006). 24. Canadian Library Association et al., RDA toolkit: Resource Description & Access (Chicago: American Library Association, 2010). 25. Jin Ha Lee et al., “Facet Analysis of Video Game Genres” (paper presented in proceedings of the 2014 iConference, Berlin, Germany, March 4–7, 2014: 125–139). 26. McDonough et al., “Preserving Virtual Worlds Final Report,” technical report, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2010. http://hdl.handle.net/2142/17097 (accessed July 1, 2014). 27. Megan A. Winget and Sampson W. Walker, “Game Development Documentation and Institutional Collection Development Policy,” Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries (2011): 29–38. 28. Sheila S. Intner and William E. Studwell, Subject Access to Films and Videos (Lake Crystal, MN: Soldier Creek Press, 1992). 29. Lori Robare, “Cataloging Guidelines for Video Games,” University of Oregon Libraries, last modiﬁed 2008. https://scholarsbank.uoregon.edu/xmlui/handle/1794/5762 (accessed on July 21, 2014). 30. Nanette Donohue, “Subject Cataloging of Video Games” [PowerPoint slides], ALA TechSource, last modiﬁed 2008. http://www.box.net/shared/ivj57×09rj 31. Catherine Lyons and Elisabeth Tappeiner, “Cataloging 2.0: Metadata Research and Initiatives at a Community College Library,” Journal of Library Metadata 8, no. 2 (2008): 155–157. 32. Shawn McCann, “Game Genres Demystiﬁed,” Library Journal 134, no. 1 (2009): 56. 33. Lee et al., “Facet Analysis,” 125–139. 34. Ibid. 35. Ibid.

178

Z. Welhouse et al.

36. UW/SIMM Video Game Metadata Schema Version 2.0 (March 31, 2014). http://gamer. ischool.uw.edu/ofﬁcial_release/
37. Jacob Jett et al., “A Conceptual Model for Video Games and Interactive Media,” Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology (JASIST) (forthcoming).
38. Alan Cooper, The Inmates Are Running the Asylum (Indianapolis: Sams, 1999). 39. Lee et al., “Developing a Video Game Metadata Schema,” 105–117. 40. Ibid. 41. Lee et al., “User-Centered Approach,” 229–238. 42. Lee et al., “Empirical Evaluation of Metadata” (in press). 43. Birger Hjørland, “Domain Analysis in Information Science. Eleven Approaches—Traditional as well as Innovative,” Journal of Documentation 58, no. 4 (2002): 422–462. 44. Jens-Erik Mai, “Analysis in Indexing: Document and Domain Centered Approaches,” Information Processing & Management 41, no. 3 (2005): 605. 45. Birger Hjørland and Hanne Albrechtsen, “Toward a New Horizon in Information Science: Domain-Analysis,” Journal of the American Society for Information Science 46 (1995): 400–425. 46. Mai, “Analysis in Indexing,” 605. 47. Annelise M. Pejtersen, “A Library System for Information Retrieval Based on a Cognitive Task Analysis and Supported by an Icon-Based Interface,” SIGIR ‘89 Proceeding of the 12th Annual International ACT SIGIR Conference on Research and the Development in Information Retrieval 23 (1989): 40–47. 48. Gordon Rugg and Peter McGeorge, “The Sorting Techniques: A Tutorial Paper on Card Sorts, Picture Sorts and Item Sorts,” Expert Systems 14, no. 2 (2002): 80–93. 49. Louise F. Spiteri, “The Use of Facet Analysis in Information Retrieval Thesauri: An Examination of Selected Guidelines for Thesaurus Construction,” Cataloging & Classiﬁcation Quarterly 25, no. 1 (1997): 21–37. 50. Michael P. Williams, Chrono Trigger (Los Angeles: Boss Fight Books, 2014). 51. QCF Design, “Desktop Dungeons.” http://store.steampowered.com/app/226620/?snr=1_200_ 200_253_203 (accessed January 12, 2014). 52. David Baker et al., “Lessons Learned from Starting a Circulating Videogame Collection at an Academic Library,” in Gaming in Academic Libraries: Collections, Marketing, and Information Literacy, ed. Amy Harris and Scott E. Rice (Chicago: Association of College and Research Libraries, 2008), 26–38. 53. Jesper Juul, “Game Telling Stories? A Brief Note on Games and Narratives,” The International Journal of Computer Game Research 1, no. 1, last modiﬁed 2001. http://www.gamestudies.org/0101/juul-gts/ (accessed December 5, 2012). 54. OLAC Cataloging Policy Committee, “Summary Notes for Catalog Records,” Online Audiovisual Catalogers, Inc., last modiﬁed August 2002. http://www.olacinc.org/drupal/?q=node/21 55. “Game Metadata and Citation Project.” https://gamecip.soe.ucsc.edu/ (accessed July 28, 2014). 56. “Simple Knowledge Organization System.” http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/ (accessed July 28, 2014). 57. “UW Gamer Group.” http://gamer.ischool.uw.edu/ofﬁcial_release/ (accessed July 28, 2014).

Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Plot Metadata

179

APPENDIX A

SN: Scope note USE: Preferred term (See) USE FOR: Equivalent terms, lead-in terms PAIRED WITH: Commonly paired with other terms RT: Related terms (See also)

TABLE A1 Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Narratives [Verbs]

Term Alter
Assist Attack Battle
Break Build Change Compete
(with/for) Confront
Conquer Create
Cure Defend Develop
Discover
Encounter

Information
SN: Use for when the goal is to actively change something [time, the landscape, etc.], not simply travel or explore.
USE FOR: change PAIRED WITH: time USE: help USE: battle or confront [depending on context] SN: Use for situations where destruction or physical defeat of the other
party is the goal. USE FOR: attack, break, cure, ﬁght, topple PAIRED WITH: monster(s), robot(s) RT: confront USE: battle USE: develop or create [depending on context] USE: alter USE: confront
SN: Use for situations where destruction of the other party is not the goal: inner struggles, debates, negotiations, contests, friendly rivalries, etc.
USE FOR: attack, compete, encounter, ﬁght, repel RT: battle SN: Use when the protagonist is forcibly taking control of the object. USE FOR: encounter, topple SN: Use when the protagonist is building non-sentient objects. USE FOR: build, encounter, topple RT: develop USE: save or battle [depending on context] USE: save SN: Use when the protagonist is improving a social connection or the
capabilities of sentient beings. USE FOR: build, raise PAIRED WITH: army, business, monster(s) RT: create SN: Use when object is found inadvertently or as the consequence of
another verb, but still important. USE FOR: learn, experience RT: seek PAIRED WITH: path USE: confront, conquer, create, or help [depending on context]
(Continued on next page)

180

Z. Welhouse et al.

Term

Information

Escape
Experience Explore
Fight Help Learn Leave
Mature Metamorphose Prevent
Pursue Raise Repel Rescue Resist
Restore
Return
Save
Seek
Solve Survive
Topple Transform
[into] Travel Undergo

SN: Use when the protagonist is trapped somewhere and is trying to leave. PAIRED WITH: dystopia, dungeon, time, world RT: leave, return USE: discover, explore, or seek [depending on context] SN: Use when journeying for its own sake or when investigating and
interacting with a location. USE FOR: experience, travel PAIRED WITH: alternate universe USE: battle or confront [depending on context] SN: Use when aiding the object in numerous or unspeciﬁed ways. USE FOR: assist, encounter USE: discover SN: Use when the protagonist is not trapped, but must nevertheless move
from one setting or condition to another. PAIRED WITH: home RT: return, escape USE: transform [into] USE: transform [into] SN: Use when the protagonists are attempting to stop the object from
occurring. PAIRED WITH: destiny, disaster, war RT: resist USE: seek USE: develop USE: confront or save [depending on context] RT: resist USE: save SN: Use when the object is inevitable, but the action is nevertheless
meaningful. PAIRED WITH: madness, morality RT: prevent, repel, survive SN: Use when the object is lost or damaged, and the goal is to repair it or
bring it back to a prior state. PAIRED WITH: order RT: save SN: Use when the protagonist must travel to a speciﬁc location, which has
been previously visited. PAIRED WITH: home RT: leave, escape SN: Use when the object is in danger of being damaged. USE FOR: cure, defend, repel, rescue PAIRED WITH: home, family RT: restore SN: Use when the character is actively searching or something. USE FOR: experience, pursue PAIRED WITH: family, self, treasure RT: discover SN: Use when the protagonist must deduce an answer to the object. PAIRED WITH: mystery SN: Use when the unwelcome object is foregone. It cannot be defeated,
only weathered. RT: resist USE: battle, conquer, or create [depending on context] SN: Use when the protagonist changes into the object. USE FOR: mature, metamorphose, undergo USE: explore USE: transform [into]

Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Plot Metadata

181

APPENDIX B

SN: Scope note USE: Preferred term (See) USE FOR: Equivalent terms, lead-in terms PAIRED WITH: Commonly paired with other terms RT: Related terms (See also)

TABLE B1 Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Narratives [Objects]

Term

Information

Adversary/Adversaries Ally/allies
Alternate Universe
Annihilation Apocalypse Armageddon Atonement Army
Artifact(s) Balance Birthright
Business
Calling Chaos Companion(s) Competitor(s) Crime Deity Destiny

USE: rival(s) RT: evil SN: Characters who are supporting and/or cooperating with the
protagonist. USE FOR: friend(s) or companion(s) SN: A world that exists on a separate plane of existence from the
protagonists’ point of origin. PAIRED WITH: explore RT: land, time, world USE: disaster USE: disaster USE: disaster USE: redemption RT: honor SN: A large body of soldiers intended for war. RT: invader(s) PAIRED WITH: develop USE: treasure USE: order SN: A privilege bestowed on a character based on birth or family
connections. RT: destiny USE FOR: calling, summons, fate SN: An organization designed primarily for material proﬁt. USE FOR: guild, shop, store PAIRED WITH: develop USE: destiny or birthright USE: order USE: ally/allies USE: rival(s) RT: evil USE: mystery USE: greater being SN: A metaphysical force that guides characters’ actions toward a
predetermined outcome. RT: birthright, knowledge USE FOR: calling, fate, summons PAIRED WITH: prevent
(Continued on next page)

182
Term Destruction Disaster
Dishonor Demon Dragon Dungeon Duty Dystopia Enchantment End of the World Enemy/Enemies Evil
Faction(s)
Family
Fate Foe Friend(s) Greater Being
Glory
God Guild Holocaust Home
Honor

Z. Welhouse et al.
Information
USE: disaster SN: A force of wide-scale destruction or loss. This includes
physical, metaphysical, and ontological threats, among others. USE FOR: annihilation, apocalypse, Armageddon, destruction, end
of the world, holocaust, obliteration PAIRED WITH: prevent RT: war USE: honor USE: monster(s) USE: greater being SN: A dangerous enclosed location. PAIRED WITH: escape USE: honor SN: An oppressive or ruined civilization PAIRED WITH: escape USE: magic USE: disaster USE: monster(s) or rival(s) SN: A philosophy of selﬁshness and hate. RT: adversary/adversaries, competitor(s), foe(s), monster(s),
opponent(s), rival(s) SN: A group of sentient non-monsters acting together to achieve a
goal. RT: intrigue, monster(s), religion, rival(s) SN: A character or characters who are related, either biologically or
through strong social ties. PAIRED WITH: save or seek USE: destiny or birthright USE: rival(s) RT: evil USE: ally/allies SN: A character whose existence is on a higher level than the
protagonist. Use for gods, artiﬁcial intelligences, and incomprehensible aliens. USE FOR: deity, dragon, god, mythical ﬁgure, super hero, supreme being RT: religion SN: Referring to personal gain, status, and reputation. Mostly beneﬁts self. USE FOR: prestige, rank, reputation RT: honor USE: greater being USE: business USE: disaster SN: Use for the protagonist or protagonist’s ancestors’ domestic residence. Often contains the connotation of being where the protagonist belongs or has origins. PAIRED WITH: leave, return, save SN: Referring to duty, decorum, and righteousness. Mostly beneﬁts others. USE FOR: atonement, dishonor, duty, reputation RT: atonement, glory, redemption
(Continued on next page)

Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Plot Metadata

183

Term Insanity Intrigue
Invader(s) Kingdom Knowledge
Land Love Madness
Magic
Mana Metaphysical power Monster(s)
Morality
Mystery
Mythical ﬁgure Obliteration Opponent Order
Path
Peace Politics Power Prestige Psychic Power

Information
USE: madness SN: Use for political schemes, plots, and attempts to subvert the
social order. USE FOR: politics RT: faction(s) SN: Outsiders who wish to take something. RT: army, monster(s), rival(s) USE: world SN: Use for speciﬁcs facts as well as broader information. USE FOR: truth RT: destiny USE: world RT: alternate universe SN: Deep emotional affection. USE FOR: romance SN: Mental disturbance. Often used to indicate corruption. USE FOR: insanity PAIRED WITH: resist SN: Supernatural power. Use regardless of how scientiﬁc the game
posits this power to be. USE FOR: enchantment, mana, metaphysical power, psychic
power, sorcery, spiritual energy, witchcraft USE: magic USE: magic SN: Non-human enemies who intend to cause harm. RT: evil, faction, invaders, rivals USE FOR: demon(s), enemy/enemies, robot(s) PAIRED WITH: battle or develop SN: The rules of right conduct, as well as characters’ acceptance of
them. USE FOR: temptation PAIRED WITH: resist SN: An unknown set of circumstances in need of an answer. USE FOR: crime PAIRED WITH: solve USE: greater being USE: disaster USE: rival(s) RT: evil SN: Use for societal and metaphysical status quo. Although this is
usually positioned as inherently positive, it needn’t be. USE FOR: balance, chaos, peace PAIRED WITH: restore SN: Used metaphorically to describe a critical shift to a character’s
personal story or surroundings. Avoid using when a more precise term is available. PAIRED WITH: discover USE: order USE: intrigue SN: The ability to enforce one’s will on the world. USE: glory USE: magic
(Continued on next page)

184
Term Rank Realm Redemption
Relic(s) Religion
Reputation Retaliation Retribution Revenge Revolution Rival(s)
Robot(s) Romance Self
Shop Sorcery Spiritual energy Store Summons Super hero Supreme being Temptation Time
Treasure
Truth Vengeance War
Witchcraft World

Z. Welhouse et al.
Information
USE: glory USE: world SN: Use for plots where the protagonist is seeking to atone for a
past misdeed. USE FOR: atonement RT: honor USE: treasure SN: Use for belief systems centered on the role of sentient beings
and their relationships to greater beings, as well as for political organizations that support the belief system. RT: faction(s), greater being USE: glory or honor USE: vengeance USE: vengeance USE: vengeance SN: Major change to the predominant social order. SN: Characters with personal or professional interest in defeating the protagonist. RT: evil, invader(s), faction, monster USE FOR: adversary/adversaries, competitor, enemy/enemies, foe, opponent USE: monsters PAIRED WITH: battle USE: love SN: The protagonist or a major component of the protagonist (e.g., physical body, emotional wholeness) PAIRED WITH: seek USE: business USE: magic USE: magic USE: business USE: birthright or destiny USE: greater being USE: greater being USE: morality SN: The primary temporal setting. RT: alternate universe PAIRED WITH: alter or explore SN: Use for material wealth and desirable physical objects. USE FOR: artifact(s) or relic(s) PAIRED WITH: seek USE: knowledge SN: Violent revenge. USE FOR: retaliation, retribution, revenge SN: Use for large-scale conﬂicts between political organizations such as nations or planets. PAIRED WITH: prevent RT: disaster USE: magic SN: The primary geographic setting. For example, this may be a small country or the entire planet. USE FOR: kingdom, realm, land RT: alternate universe PAIRED WITH: escape

Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Plot Metadata

185

APPENDIX C

TABLE C1 74 Sample Video Games with Plot Metadata

Game
Ar Tonelico II: Melody of PS2 Metafalica

Atelier Rorona:

PS3

The Alchemist of Arland

Baroque

PS2

Platform

Bastion

PC

Batman: Arkham City

XBox 360/PS3/PC

BioShock

PS3/Xbox 360/PC/Mac

Breath of Fire 3

PS

Breath of Fire 4

PS

Catherine

PS3

Chrono Cross

PS

Chrono Trigger

SNES

Costume Quest

PC/Mac/Linux/XBox 360/PS3

Defender’s Quest: Valley of PC the Forgotten
Disgaea 2: Cursed Memories PS2

Disgaea: Hour of Darkness PS2

Plot
Seek Knowledge Develop Love Battle Factions
Develop Business Create Treasure Develop Allies
Explore World Seek Redemption Transform into Greater Being
Survive Disaster Alter World Discover Knowledge
Seek Knowledge Restore Order Save World
Solve Mystery Discover Path Discover Knowledge
Seek Family Alter Order Discover Knowledge
Prevent Disaster Discover Knowledge Confront Greater Being
Confront Morality Solve Mystery Save Self
Seek Allies Alter Alternate Universe Restore Self
Prevent Disaster Alter Time Battle Greater Being
Save Family Seek Treasure Prevent Disaster
Escape World Prevent Disaster Return Home
Restore Birthright Battle Curse Battle Monsters
Restore Birthright Seek Glory Conquer World (Continued on next page)

186

Z. Welhouse et al.

Game
Dragon Quest IX: Sentinels DS of the Starry Sky

Dragon Warrior

NES

Platform

Dragon Warrior III

NES

Dungeons of Dredmor

PC/Mac/Linux

Earthbound

SNES

Fable

Xbox/PC/Mac

Fallout

PC/Mac

Final Fantasy

NES

Final Fantasy III

SNES

Final Fantasy IX

PS

Final Fantasy Legend 2

GB

Final Fantasy Tactics: The PSP War of the Lions

Final Fantasy VII

PS

Final Fantasy VIII

PS

Final Fantasy X

PS2

Final Fantasy XIII-2

PS3

FORCED

PC

Plot
Seek Treasure Prevent Disaster Restore Order
Save Ally Restore Order Battle Monsters
Battle Monsters Explore World Save World
Battle Monsters Explore World Save World
Save World Leave Home Discover Allies
Confront Morality Explore World Seek Family
Survive Dystopia Explore Dystopia Save World
Restore Order Explore World Seek Treasure
Save World Survive Disaster Restore Order
Save World Restore Order Develop Allies
Restore Order Seek Treasure Seek Family
Discover Intrigue Save World Develop Army
Save World Restore Order Seek Knowledge
Save World Restore Order Develop Self
Save World Return Home Develop Love
Alter Time Prevent Disaster Solve Mystery
Escape Greater Being Survive World Battle Monsters (Continued on next page)

Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Plot Metadata

187

Game Gods Eater Burst

Platform PSP

Heavy Rain

PS3

Kingdom Hearts

PS

L. A. Noire

PS3/Xbox 360/PC

La Pucelle Tactics

PS2

Legend of Legaia

PS

Little King’s Story

Wii

Mass Effect

Xbox 360/PS3/PC

Muramasa: The Demon’s Wii Blade

Nethack

PC

Ogre Battle: Let Us Cling PSP Together

Okage: Shadow King

PS

Persona 2: Innocent Sin PSP

Pokemon White: Version 2 DS

Portal

Xbox 360/PS3/PC

Prince of Persia: The Sands PS2/Xbox/GameCube/PC/PS3 of Time

Radiant Historia

DS

Plot
Survive Disaster Battle Monsters Discover Intrigue
Solve Mystery Confront Self Seek Redemption
Explore Alternate Universe Confront Allies Battle Faction
Solve Mystery Confront Intrigue Battle Factions
Battle Monsters Seek Glory Save World
Restore World Alter Treasure Seek Treasure
Conquer World Develop World Battle Monsters
Save World Prevent Disaster Confront Morality
Battle Curse Restore Self Battle Monsters
Seek Treasure Escape World Transform into Greater Being
Confront Morality Restore Home Conquer World
Battle Curse Conquer World Seek Power
Solve Mystery Confront Self Discover Maturity
Seek Allies Develop Allies Battle Faction
Escape World Confront Greater Being Solve Mystery
Alter Time Restore Treasure Restore Order
Alter Time Prevent Disaster Solve Mystery (Continued on next page)

188

Z. Welhouse et al.

Game Radiata Stories

Platform PS2

Recettear: An Item Shop’s PC Tale.

Sakura Wars: So Long My PS2 Love

Shadow Hearts

PS2

Shin Megami Tensei:

PS2

Persona 3

Shin Megami Tensei:

PS2

Persona 4

Star Ocean: Till the End of PS2 Time

Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic

Xbox/PC/Mac/iPad

Steambot Chronicles

PS2

Suikoden

PS

Suikoden II

PS

Suikoden III

PS2

Suikoden IV

PS2

Suikoden V

PS2

Super Mario Bros.

NES

Super Mario RPG: Legend of the Seven Stars
Tales of Graces F

SNES PS3

Plot
Seek Allies Discover Path Confront Morality
Seek Treasure Explore World Develop Business
Save World Develop Relationships Seek Glory
Develop Love Save Ally Seek Knowledge
Develop Friendships Confront Self Prevent Disaster
Develop Friendships Confront Self Prevent Disaster
Explore Alternate Universe Discover Knowledge Develop Friendship
Confront Morality Seek Knowledge Solve War
Explore World Seek Knowledge Help Allies
Develop Army Battle Faction Confront Intrigue
Develop Army Battle Invaders Confront Intrigue
Develop Army Save World Confront Destiny
Develop Army Battle Invaders Confront Destiny
Confront Intrigue Develop Army Restore Birthright
Explore World Battle Monsters Save Ally
Save World Battle Invader Seek Treasure
Explore Alternate Universe Discover Knowledge Develop Friendship (Continued on next page)

Controlled Vocabulary for Video Game Plot Metadata

189

Game Tales of Symphonia

Platform GameCube, PS2, PS3

The Last Story

Wii

The Legend of Zelda: The Ocarina of Time
The Twisted Tales of Spike McFang
The World Ends with You

N64 SNES DS

Torneko’s Mystery Dungeon PS

Valkyrie Proﬁle

PS

Xenogears

PS

Plot
Explore Alternate Universe Discover Knowledge Restore Order
Develop Love Seek Glory Restore Order
Alter Time Save Allies Battle Evil
Save World Battle Monsters Battle Family
Solve Mystery Return Home Save Allies
Seek Treasure Explore World Develop Business
Seek Allies Resist Disaster Confront Duty
Battle Greater Being Save World Confront Self

